Ocean Sci., 19, 837–856, 2023
https://doi.org/10.5194/os-19-837-2023
© Author(s) 2023. This work is distributed under
the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License.
High interannual surface pCO2 variability in the southern
Canadian Arctic Archipelago’s Kitikmeot Sea
Richard P. Sims1, Mohamed M. M. Ahmed1,2,3, Brian J. Butterworth4,5, Patrick J. Duke6, Stephen F. Gonski7,
Samantha F. Jones1, Kristina A. Brown8,9, Christopher J. Mundy9, William J. Williams8, and Brent G. T. Else1
1Department of Geography, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, T2N 1N4, Canada
2Geology Department, Beni-Suef University, 101 Salah Salem St., Bani Sweif, 62511, Egypt
3Education and Research Group, Esri Canada, Calgary, Alberta, T2P 3T7, Canada
4Cooperative Institute for Research in Environmental Sciences, University of Colorado, Boulder, Colorado, USA
5NOAA Physical Sciences Laboratory, Boulder, Colorado, USA
6School of Earth and Ocean Sciences, University of Victoria, Victoria, British Columbia V8W 2Y2, Canada
7School of Marine Science and Policy, University of Delaware, Lewes, Delaware, USA
8Institute of Ocean Sciences, Fisheries and Oceans Canada, Sidney, British Columbia V8L 5T5, Canada
9Centre for Earth Observation Science, Department of Environment and Geography,
University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB R3T 2N2, Canada
Correspondence: Richard P. Sims (richardpeter.sims@ucalgary.ca)
Received: 28 July 2022 – Discussion started: 4 August 2022
Revised: 22 February 2023 – Accepted: 30 March 2023 – Published: 15 June 2023
Abstract. Warming of the Arctic due to climate change
means the Arctic Ocean is now free from ice for longer, as
sea ice melts earlier and refreezes later. Yet, it remains un-
clear how this extended ice-free period will impact carbon
dioxide (CO2) ﬂuxes due to scarcity of surface ocean CO2
measurements. Baseline measurements are urgently needed
to understand spatial and temporal air–sea CO2 ﬂux vari-
ability in the changing Arctic Ocean. There is also uncer-
tainty as to whether the previous basin-wide surveys are rep-
resentative of the many smaller bays and inlets that make
up the Canadian Arctic Archipelago (CAA). By using a re-
search vessel that is based in the remote Inuit community of
Ikaluqtuutiak (Cambridge Bay, Nunavut), we have been able
to reliably survey pCO2 shortly after ice melt and access
previously unsampled bays and inlets in the nearby region.
Here we present 4 years of consecutive summertime pCO2
measurements collected in the Kitikmeot Sea in the southern
CAA. Overall, we found that this region is a sink for atmo-
spheric CO2 in August (average of all calculated ﬂuxes over
the four cruises was −4.64 mmol m−2 d−1), but the magni-
tude of this sink varies substantially between years and lo-
cations (average calculated ﬂuxes of +3.58, −2.96, −16.79
and −0.57 mmol m−2 d−1 during the 2016, 2017, 2018 and
2019 cruises, respectively). Surface ocean pCO2 varied by
up to 156 µatm between years, highlighting the importance
of repeat observations in this region, as this high interannual
variability would not have been captured by sparse and infre-
quent measurements. We ﬁnd that the surface ocean pCO2
value at the time of ice melt is extremely important in con-
straining the magnitude of the air–sea CO2 ﬂux throughout
the ice-free season. However, further constraining the air–sea
CO2 ﬂux in the Kitikmeot Sea will require a better under-
standing of how pCO2 changes outside of the summer sea-
son. Surface ocean pCO2 measurements made in small bays
and inlets of the Kitikmeot Sea were ∼20–40 µatm lower
than in the main channels. Surface ocean pCO2 measure-
ments made close in time to ice breakup (i.e. within 2 weeks)
were ∼50 µatm lower than measurements made > 4 weeks
after breakup. As previous basin-wide surveys of the CAA
have focused on the deep shipping channels and rarely mea-
sure close to the ice breakup date, we hypothesize that there
may be an observational bias in previous studies, leading to
an underestimate of the CO2 sink in the CAA. These high-
resolution measurements constitute an important new base-
line for gaining a better understanding of the role this region
plays in the uptake of atmospheric CO2.
Published by Copernicus Publications on behalf of the European Geosciences Union.

838
R. P. Sims et al.: High interannual surface pCO2 variability in the southern Canadian
1
Introduction
The Arctic Ocean plays an important role in the global car-
bon cycle as a sink for atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2)
(Bates and Mathis, 2009). Gas exchange and CO2 drawdown
is enhanced in cold polar surface waters because the solu-
bility of CO2 increases at low temperatures; this is known
as the ocean solubility pump (Parmentier et al., 2013). De-
spite its role as a sink for CO2, the magnitude of CO2 up-
take by the Arctic Ocean is poorly constrained, as the re-
gion remains spatially and temporally under-sampled due to
difﬁcult seasonal access heavily skewing measurements to
the ice-free summer period (DeGrandpre et al., 2020). Ad-
ditionally, logistical constraints in poorly charted nearshore
waters also tend to bias underway CO2 measurements to es-
tablished shipping routes and the deep ocean basins, leaving
much of the Arctic coastal zone under-sampled in the Sur-
face Ocean CO2 Atlas (SOCAT v2022; Bakker, 2016). This
is not a trivial oversight, given that the Arctic Ocean is en-
circled by coasts and their associated shelf seas, 53 % of the
∼10.7 × 106 km2 of Arctic Ocean surface area is < 200 m
deep (Jakobsson, 2002).
The Arctic is already being heavily impacted by climate
change (Landrum and Holland, 2020), with potentially dev-
astating impacts on the Inuit and other Indigenous communi-
ties who live there (Ford et al., 2008). It is not certain how the
Arctic carbon system will respond to climate change and how
the effects of processes like ocean acidiﬁcation will manifest
and impact Inuit communities. Projecting long-term change
in regions with complex biogeochemistry (i.e. the coastal do-
main) is particularly difﬁcult. To better predict how the Arc-
tic carbon system will change in the future requires baseline
measurements, including detailed surveys and regular mon-
itoring of oceanic pCO2, that reﬂect the diverse nature of
Arctic marine environments.
The Canadian Arctic Archipelago (CAA) is made up of
numerous islands that cover 13 % of the Arctic Ocean (Mac-
donald et al., 2010) and account for the bulk of Canada’s
162 000 km of Arctic coastline (Wynja et al., 2015). The is-
lands of the CAA form a complex bathymetry which is im-
portant in determining the circulation in the CAA (Wang
et al., 2012). The majority of existing pCO2 measurements
made in the CAA were collected along the southern route
through the Northwest Passage on the research icebreaker
CCGS Amundsen (Ahmed et al., 2019). This large pCO2
dataset was used to estimate a −7.7 ± 4 Tg C yr−1 sink for
the CAA during the open water season (Ahmed and Else,
2019). The CCGS Amundsen pCO2 dataset provides excel-
lent broad spatial coverage of the CAA, but the vast area sur-
veyed was limited in temporal coverage and ﬁne spatial de-
tail. The CCGS Amundsen typically only transited through
the central straits, channels, gulfs, and seas of the south-
ern Northwest Passage once each summer. The numerous
bays and inlets that are off the main channel were not sam-
pled, meaning that local-scale pCO2 variability was poten-
tially unaccounted for during the synoptic-scale sampling.
This small-scale pCO2 variability is difﬁcult to predict em-
pirically and may be better observed via regional studies. For
example, the model of Ahmed et al. (2019) was shown to un-
derestimate pCO2 by an average of ∼26 µatm in Coronation
Gulf and Dease Strait regions of the Kitikmeot Sea. Ahmed
et al. (2019) postulated that large river inﬂow in the region
may account for divergences from their model, understand-
ing whether this is the case warrants further investigation and
makes the Kitikmeot Sea a prime location for focused study.
Our understanding of the inorganic carbon system in the
Kitikmeot Sea region primarily comes from three distinct
sources of measurements. Firstly, the 2010–2016 summer-
time ship measurements of pCO2 in the central channel of
the Kitikmeot presented by Ahmed et al. (2019). Their mea-
surements show the region to be slightly undersaturated at
the beginning of August, becoming slightly supersaturated
in the middle of August through to the middle of Septem-
ber and then becoming undersaturated again in early October.
Coronation Gulf is one of the few areas of the CAA that was
consistently observed to be supersaturated with CO2 in sum-
mer. Supersaturation of pCO2 in Coronation Gulf is likely
a result of high summer surface seawater temperatures (CO2
thermodynamics mean that a 1 ◦C temperature increase in-
creases pCO2 by 4.23 %, Takahashi et al., 1993) and high
river discharge, particularly to the southwest (Geilfus et al.,
2018). The second source of carbonate system measurements
in the region are CO2 ﬂux observations at the Qikirtaarjuk
Island observatory on the Finlayson Islands in Dease Strait
(Butterworth and Else, 2018). Their measurements from the
2017 ice breakup season through to the summer indicate that
there is CO2 drawdown and thus undersaturation at breakup
and for the ﬁrst 2 weeks of open water. Near the end of July,
the region transitions into a CO2 source through to the end
of August (Butterworth and Else, 2018). The region reverts
to a sink in late August as the sea cools and surface pCO2
declines; the region remains a sink until there is almost full
ice cover in November (Butterworth et al., 2023, in prepa-
ration). A similar pattern was observed in the summer of
2018, except when pCO2 began to fall in late August the
region notably did not revert all the way back into a sink
(Butterworth et al., 2023, in preparation). The third source
of carbonate system measurements is provided by Duke et
al. (2021), who report autonomous pCO2 measurements at a
depth of 7 m from an instrument installed on the Ocean Net-
works Canada (ONC) underwater sensor mooring in Cam-
bridge Bay between August 2015 and August 2018. The sen-
sor measurements from Cambridge Bay indicate that pCO2
is supersaturated in winter and undersaturated by the start of
June at the onset of sea ice melt (Duke et al., 2021). Their
measurements show that there is a short period of supersatu-
ration in the middle of August coinciding with increased sea
water temperature, the ocean then quickly returns to a CO2
sink and remains undersaturated up until freeze-up (Duke et
al., 2021). Duke et al. (2021) conﬁrmed that the biogeochem-
Ocean Sci., 19, 837–856, 2023
https://doi.org/10.5194/os-19-837-2023

R. P. Sims et al.: High interannual surface pCO2 variability in the southern Canadian
839
ical measurements at the ONC site were representative of the
offshore area during most seasons by comparing discrete dis-
solved inorganic carbon (DIC) and total alkalinity (TA) sam-
ples collected at both 2 and 7 m at the ONC platform and
an offshore station (B1). The surface stratiﬁcation at ONC
breaks down after the 2-week sea ice melt and river runoff
period in early July. After the sea ice melt and river runoff
period, DIC, TA, salinity, and temperature values recorded
by the ONC mooring are then once again representative of
the surface mixed layer.
All three sources of measurements indicate that there is
notable interannual variability in surface pCO2 in the Ki-
tikmeot Sea. The ship-based measurements provide a snap-
shot of spatial variability across the wider region during the
open-water season, whereas the time series from Qikirtaar-
juk Island observatory and the ONC mooring provide in-
sights into seasonal and interannual variability at speciﬁc lo-
cations. There are obvious shortcomings to both approaches.
Icebreaker-based studies may under-represent small-scale
variability that exists in nearshore regions that are inacces-
sible due to the vessel’s large draft. However, the ﬁxed ob-
servatories may over-represent temporal variability that is
location-speciﬁc; for example, the ONC mooring is in an
enclosed bay close to the outlet of a river (Manning et al.,
2020), and the ﬂux footprint of the island observatory spans
a hotspot for mixing and productivity (Dalman et al., 2019).
Given the limitations of each of these data sources, there is a
need to understand how representative they are of the wider
Kitikmeot Sea region.
In this paper, we present surface pCO2 measurements
made during annual summertime surveys of the Kitikmeot
Sea between 2016 and 2019. We use these new pCO2 mea-
surements to determine the magnitude of CO2 uptake in the
Kitikmeot Sea shortly after ice breakup. These new pCO2
measurements allow us to bridge the gap between previous
measurements, which were made at contrasting spatial scales
(e.g. the low-spatial-variability point-scale observation from
the local carbon observatories and the large-scale CAA-wide
pCO2 measurements). We use our new measurements to ex-
plore whether there are small-scale regional pCO2 differ-
ences in the inlets and bays of the CAA that are not ad-
equately represented by CAA-wide sampling. We also use
our new measurements to explore pCO2 variability in the
proximity of these observatories to determine whether they
are representative of the wider region. In attempting to unify
existing measurements, we aim to unravel the seasonal and
interannual variability of pCO2 in the region.
2
Methods
2.1
Oceanographic setting
The Kitikmeot Sea (Fig. 1) is a shallow shelf sea within the
CAA that encompasses Coronation Gulf to the west and that
is linked via Dease Strait to Queen Maud Gulf in the east,
Bathurst Inlet to the south, and Chantrey Inlet to the south-
east (Williams et al., 2018). The communities of Cambridge
Bay, Kugluktuk, and Gjoa Haven, Nunavut, are the main
year-round settlements in the Kitikmeot Sea region. River in-
puts from mainland Canada and snow and ice melt provide
a considerable source of freshwater in the region (Williams
et al., 2018), resulting in some of the lowest-salinity surface
waters in the CAA (Ahmed et al., 2019). The Kitikmeot Sea
is strongly nitrogen limited (Back et al., 2021), with surface
nitrate concentrations of 1.3 µmol L−1 (Dalman et al., 2019),
and as a result chlorophyll concentrations are also low in the
region (Kim et al., 2020). Observations and modelling of the
physical oceanography of the region demonstrates that the
stratiﬁcation regime in Dease Strait and Queen Maud Gulf
is characterized by a ∼40 m warm fresh surface layer and a
cold salty bottom layer that extends down to around 100 m
(Xu et al., 2021). Coronation Gulf has a three-layer regime
composed of a 40 m warm fresh surface layer, a colder salty
layer down to 100 m and a stable deep layer down to 350 m
(Xu et al., 2021). Vertical mixing in the Kitikmeot Sea is pro-
hibited by strong stratiﬁcation throughout most of the year;
however, after sea ice breakup wind-driven mixing gradually
deepens the surface mixed layer, resulting in an almost fully
mixed water column in Dease Strait (Xu et al., 2021).
The oceanographic boundary for the Kitikmeot Sea has
been designated as where the shelf shoals to < 30 m in
the west (Dolphin and Union Strait) and northeast (Victo-
ria Strait) (Williams et al., 2018). At the Dolphin and Union
Strait, warm fresh surface seawater ﬂows out across the sills
and subsurface ﬂows of more saline nutrient-rich Paciﬁc wa-
ters enter the sea. Another feature of the Kitikmeot Sea is
that strong tidal currents in narrow channels can keep certain
areas ice-free in winter (Williams et al., 2018). Strong tidal
currents beneath sea ice such as around the Finlayson Islands
in Dease Strait act to slow winter sea ice growth and en-
hance primary production by introducing nutrients (Dalman
et al., 2019). First-year sea ice dominates the Kitikmeot Sea
although some multiyear ice may be blown into Queen Maud
Gulf from the northern part of the CAA (Xu et al., 2021).
Seawater temperatures across the Kitikmeot Sea vary consid-
erably throughout the year; they are around −2 ◦C in winter
and reach upwards of 10 ◦C in summer (Xu et al., 2021). The
bounding sills, large freshwater inputs and low nutrient loads
make the Kitikmeot Sea unique within the CAA.
2.2
Field campaign description
Annual oceanographic surveys of the summertime surface
seawater partial pressure of carbon dioxide (pCO2 (sw)) were
conducted between 2016 and 2019 in the Kitikmeot Sea
(Fig. 1) aboard the RV Martin Bergmann as part of the Ma-
rine Environmental Observation, Prediction and Response
Network (MEOPAR) and Kitikmeot Sea Science Study
(K3S) programmes (cruise details in Table S1). In each of
https://doi.org/10.5194/os-19-837-2023
Ocean Sci., 19, 837–856, 2023

840
R. P. Sims et al.: High interannual surface pCO2 variability in the southern Canadian
Figure 1. A map of the Kitikmeot Sea. The main settlements in the region (Cambridge Bay, Kugluktuk and Gjoa Haven) are labelled, as are
the Ocean Networks Canada mooring and the Finlayson Islands (where the Qikirtaarjuk Island observatory is located). Shoreline data were
taken from the World Vector Shoreline database, and river data were taken from the CIA World Data Bank II (WDBII), both of which were
accessed via the Global Self-consistent, Hierarchical, High-resolution Geography Database (GSHHG) (Wessel and Smith, 1996). Bathymetry
data were taken from the 2 min Gridded Global Relief Data (ETOPO2) v2 database (NGDC, 2006). This map was made using tools from the
M_Map MATLAB plotting package (Pawlowicz, 2020).
the 4 years, an underway pCO2 system was deployed on
cruises conducted under ice-free conditions between early
August and mid-September. The Canadian High Arctic Re-
search Station (CHARS) in Cambridge Bay, Nunavut, acted
as a staging ground for this work as Cambridge Bay is the
home port for the RV Martin Bergmann.
Between 2016 and 2019, the cruise track varied from year
to year depending on the objectives of the research con-
ducted (Fig. 2). The ﬁrst week of each summer ﬁeld season
was typically used to complete work for the MEOPAR pro-
gramme, the majority of the ship time for the MEOPAR work
was spent in the proximity of Cambridge Bay, the Finlayson
Islands, Wellington Bay and the western region of Queen
Maud Gulf. Cruises in mid to late August were used to con-
duct work for the K3S programme; for the K3S work the ship
typically travelled further from Cambridge Bay heading into
Bathurst Inlet, the central region of Queen Maud Gulf and
Chantrey Inlet. The opportunistic nature of the data collec-
tion meant that data density varied between regions, as not
every region was surveyed each year.
Sea ice concentrations in the months preceding each an-
nual survey were taken from the daily gridded 3.125 km
AMSR2 satellite radiometer product (Spreen et al., 2008).
To determine weeks since open water, the nearest point on
the AMSR2 grid was determined for each pCO2 (sw) mea-
surement. The time between the measurement and when sea
ice concentration fell constantly below the threshold value
for the marginal ice zone (85 %) (Cruz-García et al., 2021)
was then calculated.
2.3
Underway system
The RV Martin Bergmann is a 20 m re-purposed commer-
cial ﬁshing trawler from Newfoundland with a draft of 3.4 m
(Fig. 3a and b). The ship does not have its own dedicated
integrated underway system; instead surface seawater was
sampled from an inlet at a depth of ∼1 m through ∼2 m
of 0.5 in. ID PVC tubing securely draped over the bulwark
of the vessel through an external hatch (Fig. 3c and d). A
Waterra Tempest WSP-12V-3 submersible pump was used to
pump surface seawater through this inlet tubing at a rate of
10 L min−1. In situ surface seawater temperature (SST(1 m))
was measured by a Campbell Scientiﬁc 107 temperature sen-
sor (error of <± 0.01 ◦C over the measurement range) at-
tached to the tubing inlet.
Upon entering the ship, the ﬂow of seawater passed
through a SoMAS MSRC VDB-1 vortex debubbler and was
split between several instruments via Tygon tubing (Fig. 3).
An Idronaut Ocean Seven 315 On-line module thermosalino-
graph measured seawater temperature (SST(tsg)) with an ac-
curacy of 0.003 ◦C and conductivity with an accuracy of
0.003 mS cm−1 at a seawater ﬂow rate of 0.5 L min−1. A
Wetlabs ECO BBFL2B Triplet measured ﬂuorescence with a
sensitivity of 0.025 µg L−1 at a ﬂow rate of 2.5 L min−1. The
output of the ECO ﬂuorescence sensor was post-processed
to remove spikes from bubbles and particles but was not cali-
brated against in situ measurements. A ﬂow of 2 L min−1 was
directed to the seawater equilibrator. Instrument ﬂow rates
were set with manual ﬂowmeters so that the internal instru-
Ocean Sci., 19, 837–856, 2023
https://doi.org/10.5194/os-19-837-2023

R. P. Sims et al.: High interannual surface pCO2 variability in the southern Canadian
841
Figure 2. Ship cruise tracks for each of the 4 surveyed years. The Ocean Networks Canada mooring and the Qikirtaarjuk Island Observatory
where the eddy covariance tower is located are shown by black dots.
ment volumes and associated tubing of the Idronaut, ECO
and equilibrator were ﬂushed at the same rate; this meant that
approximately half of the 10 L min−1 ﬂow from the pump
was not analysed and was discarded overboard.
A commercially available Sunburst Sensors underway
SuperCO2 system measured surface seawater CO2; an iden-
tical system was previously described by Evans et al. (2019).
The SuperCO2 system follows the general recommenda-
tions of Dickson et al. (2007) SOP5. A Permapure Liqui-
Cel 2.5X8 series membrane contactor was used as the equili-
brator for the pCO2 system, and the waterside seawater ﬂow
rate for the equilibrator was approximately 2 L min−1. Sea-
water temperature was measured at the equilibrator seawater
inlet using a thermistor (T(equ)). The gas counter ﬂow into
the equilibrator was supplied by an air pump at a ﬂow rate
of 100 mL min−1. CO2 has been shown to fully equilibrate
in this model Liqui-Cel when set up in a single-pass setup
at these water and gas ﬂow rates (Sims et al., 2017). The
system does not utilize a dryer and thus does not require a
water vapour correction in post-processing as the equilibra-
tor is assumed to be at 100 % humidity. For additional ac-
curacy, the inbuilt H2O sensor was calibrated with a LI-610
Portable Dew Point Generator on-site before each deploy-
ment, the dew point generator has an accuracy of ± 0.2 ◦C.
The SuperCO2 system has a standard multi-position valve
and alternates between equilibrator air, atmospheric samples,
and three gas standards. The timing of the valve switching
was set so that each of the three CO2 standards (CO2 mix-
ing ratios (xCO2) of 255.1, 409.9 and 566.4) were ﬂushed
through the system at 200 mL min−1 for 5 min every 6 h.
Standard gases were certiﬁed at the University of Manitoba
against standards obtained from Environment and Climate
Change Canada and are thus traceable to World Meteorolog-
ical Organization standards. The SuperCO2 system has an in-
tegrated air pump conﬁgured to make atmospheric measure-
ments; these measurements were not used due to contami-
nation from the ship’s exhaust. The SuperCO2 system also
measured atmospheric pressure P(atm).
Measurements from the underway system were logged
every minute. The xCO2 values and related variables were
logged to the computer of the SuperCO2 system, the data
recorded by the ECO were logged to a separate data ﬁle,
and the latitude and longitude, recorded with a Garmin
GPS16X-HVS GPS unit, were logged to a Campbell Scien-
tiﬁc CR300 data logger. The CO2 measured by the system
were processed following SOP 5 (Dickson et al., 2007). The
xCO2 value is the output provided by the Licor 850 in the
SuperCO2 system; xCO2 is calibrated using a piecewise lin-
ear interpolation in time with the three standards. As there
was no dryer the equilibrator is assumed to be at full humid-
ity; the partial pressure in the equilibrator (pCO2 (equ)) was
therefore calculated by multiplying by atmospheric pressure
P (atm). The pCO2 (equ) value was converted to pCO2 (1 m) us-
ing T(equ), SST(1 m) and the fractional temperature change
constant of Takahashi et al. (1993). The depth of the sea-
water inlet was validated each year by comparing the ther-
mosalinograph salinity and the in situ temperature sensor
with surface temperature and salinity from conductivity–
temperature–depth (CTD) rosette measurements at the sur-
face. As there was no in situ temperature sensor during the
2017 and 2018 ﬁeld seasons, the warming was characterized
from T(equ) and CTD rosette measurements following Ahmed
https://doi.org/10.5194/os-19-837-2023
Ocean Sci., 19, 837–856, 2023

842
R. P. Sims et al.: High interannual surface pCO2 variability in the southern Canadian
Figure 3. (a) Image of the RV Martin Bergmann at sea taken in August 2017. (b) Image of RV Martin Bergmann stored on its trailer taken
on a mild day in May 2019. (c) Labelled photograph of the underway system installed in the ship’s lab space. (d) Detailed cross-sectional
schematic of the underway system with labelled instruments and ﬂow rates. Instruments mounted to the wall are shown with a yellow
background, water circulation is shown in blue and air circulation is shown in red.
et al. (2019); details of this can be found in the Supplement.
Additionally, median observational values of −0.17 ◦C and
+0.1 were added to the in situ temperature and salinity to ac-
count for ubiquitous skin effects when calculating interfacial
seawater pCO2 (Woolf et al., 2019).
Using an identical setup, DeGrandpre et al. (2020) esti-
mate the pCO2 uncertainty as ± 5 µatm, this is the uncer-
tainty for our 2016 and 2019 measurements. In 2017 and
2018, there is an additional uncertainty component associ-
ated with using an empirical relationship to obtain SST(1m).
This additional uncertainty was calculated by taking the root-
mean-square deviation (RMSD) values from those empirical
relationships (2017 = 0.49, 2018 = 0.64 ◦C) and propagating
them through the temperature equation for pCO2 (1 m) (Taka-
hashi et al., 1993). This resulted in an additional 2.09 % and
2.74 % uncertainty in pCO2 (1 m); these values are similar to
the 2 % uncertainty reported by Ahmed et al. (2019) follow-
ing the same method. For a pCO2 (equ) value of 300 µatm
this equates to an additional 6.3 and 8.2 µatm uncertainty for
each year, respectively. Propagating uncertainties gives aver-
age uncertainties of 8.04 and 9.60 µatm for 2017 and 2018,
respectively. The calculation of the 2017 and 2018 uncertain-
ties is consistent with the International Bureau of Weights
and Measures (BIPM) guide to the expression of uncertainty
in measurement (GUM) methodology (JCGM, 2008).
The standard system conﬁguration during the four cruises
is detailed above; changes from this conﬁguration during
speciﬁc cruises are detailed in the Supplement (Table S2).
There are several logistical aspects associated with deploy-
ing, operating, and maintaining an underway pCO2 system
in a remote Arctic location on a small vessel like the RV Mar-
tin Bergmann; this is discussed further in the Supplement.
Ocean Sci., 19, 837–856, 2023
https://doi.org/10.5194/os-19-837-2023

R. P. Sims et al.: High interannual surface pCO2 variability in the southern Canadian
843
2.4
Calculations: air–sea CO2 ﬂuxes
In the absence of a reliable ship-based atmospheric CO2
record, hourly measurements were taken from the at-
mospheric observatory in Utqia˙gvik, Alaska (71.32◦N,
156.61◦W) (Thoning, 2020; Peterson et al., 1987). Despite
the long distance between Utqia˙gvik and the Kitikmeot Sea
(around 1800 km), atmospheric CO2 are very similar at both
locations as the atmosphere is well mixed for a gas with a
long residence time like CO2, and both locations are remote
northern sites away from biogenic and industrial emissions.
To validate this assumption, a long-term (1985–2019) mean
difference of 0.246 µatm was calculated between the hourly
measurements at Utqia˙gvik and weekly atmospheric samples
from Alert, Nunavut (Lan et al., 2022). Wind speed adjusted
to a reference height of 10 m (U10) was taken from the Qikir-
taarjuk Island observatory (Butterworth and Else, 2018) for
the 2017 and 2018 ﬁeld seasons, whereas a four times daily
record of U10 from the NCEP-DOE v2 reanalysis product
(Kalnay et al., 1996) was used for the 2016 and 2019 ﬁeld
seasons.
The air–sea ﬂuxes of CO2 (F, mmol m−2 d−1) were cal-
culated as follows:
F(sea-air) = kwk01pCO2.
(1)
The water-phase gas transfer velocity (kw, cm h−1) was cal-
culated using U10 and the parameterization of Nightingale et
al. (2000), and a unitless Schmidt number (Sc) normalized to
a Sc of 660 (Wanninkhof, 2014) was used to scale kw.
kw =

0.222(U10)2 + 0.333(U10)

(Sc/660)−1/2
(2)
1pCO2 (µatm) is the partial pressure difference between the
seawater interface and air 1pCO2 = pCO2 (sw) – pCO2 (air).
The solubility of CO2 in seawater (k0, mol L−1 atm−1) was
taken from Weiss (1974). The Schmidt number and solubil-
ity were calculated using the in situ temperature and salinity
values adjusted for skin effects (Woolf et al., 2019).
Direct measurements of the air–sea CO2 ﬂuxes (F(sea-air))
made using the micrometeorological eddy covariance tech-
nique (Butterworth and Else, 2018) were used to in-
fer pCO2 (sw) by rearranging the ﬂux equation. That was
achieved using pCO2 (air) from the Licor 7200 at the Qikir-
taarjuk Island observatory and SST and SSS (sea surface
salinity) from a mooring at a depth of 13 m which was 1 km
from the eddy covariance tower (Butterworth et al., 2023 in
preparation). An eddy covariance ﬂux footprint is the area
over which the eddy covariance measurements correspond
to and varies depending on atmospheric conditions. Using
the Kljun et al. (2015) footprint model, Butterworth and
Else (2018) showed that the footprint of the Qikirtaarjuk Is-
land observatory during spring and summer can be modelled
as an ellipse with an upwind axis that varies between approx-
imately 0.75 and 2.0 km and a cross-wind axis that varies
between 0.1 and 0.2 km. The effective ﬂux footprint is, how-
ever, much smaller, as over 90 % of the ﬂux signal comes
from within 100 m of the eddy covariance tower. Uncertainty
in the pCO2 (sw) values derived using eddy covariance arises
from uncertainty in the ﬂux measurements (hourly uncer-
tainty of ∼20 % in the Arctic) (Dong et al., 2021a), un-
certainty in the gas transfer parameterization (∼5 %–10 %)
(Woolf et al., 2019), the small uncertainty in the atmospheric
pCO2 value, and uncertainties in k0 and the Schmidt number
(including uncertainties in SST and salinity inputs from the
13 m mooring).
 F(sea-air)/kwk0

+ pCO2 (air) = pCO2 (sw)
(3)
3
Results
To facilitate comparisons between the four summertime
cruises, observations have been partitioned into separate
oceanographic zones based on the local geography, ob-
servational data density, previous pCO2 (sw) measurements,
and proximity to the local carbon observatories (Fig. 4a).
Bathurst Inlet and Chantrey Inlet were designated zones
based on their large freshwater inputs. The Finlayson Islands
and Cambridge Bay are where the Qikirtaarjuk Island ob-
servatory and ONC mooring are located, respectively; these
regions were also heavily surveyed because the RV Mar-
tin Bergmann often returned to port in Cambridge Bay and
passed the islands to access Wellington Bay and Bathurst In-
let. Wellington Bay (Fig. 1) is a shallow, partially enclosed
basin for which a relatively large amount of data were col-
lected due to annual ﬁsh-tagging surveys associated with the
local subsistence char ﬁshery (Harris et al., 2020). All the
measurements in the Dease Strait west zone were made in the
central channel and are in the same approximate geographi-
cal region to those collected by Ahmed et al. (2019). Most of
the measurements in the Queen Maud Gulf zone were made
in the west; the box is large enough to include sparse mea-
surements in the central and northern regions, which do not
warrant being considered separately.
Observations of temperature, salinity, pCO2 (sw), ﬂuores-
cence, U10, and CO2 ﬂux during the four ﬁeld seasons are
plotted as time series and coloured by the sub-region of the
measurement (Fig. 4b–g). Summary statistics (mean, stan-
dard deviation, and range) of each variable in each region for
all four cruises are presented in Table 1. Plots showing the
timing of the cruise track, temperature, salinity, pCO2 (sw),
and chlorophyll a ﬂuorescence can be found in the Supple-
ment (Figs. S2 to S6).
SST(1 m) interannual variability was on the order of sev-
eral degrees (Fig. 4b), for example the SST(1 m) was low-
est in 2018 (4.3 ◦C) and highest in 2017 (8.4 ◦C) (Table 1).
Inter-region SST(1 m) differences of ∼10 ◦C were observed
during all four surveys, for example in 2016 the range in
SST was 3.18–12.13 ◦C (Table 1). Summertime warming can
be observed in the data for certain sub-regions that were
https://doi.org/10.5194/os-19-837-2023
Ocean Sci., 19, 837–856, 2023

844
R. P. Sims et al.: High interannual surface pCO2 variability in the southern Canadian
Figure 4. (a) Map of Kitikmeot Sea showing the region surveyed by the RV Martin Bergmann between 2016 and 2019. The sampled region
was subdivided as described in the main text; these sub-regions are shown as coloured boxes and correspond to the names in the legend.
Time series subplots of underway surface ocean (1 m) observations for 2016 through to 2019 of (b) SST(1m), (c) salinity, (d) pCO2(sw)
(with pCO2(atm) in black), (e) ﬂuorescence, (f) U10, and (g) ﬂux of CO2 (no ﬂux is indicated by a dashed black line). The time series data
are coloured according to the sampling regions in panel (a). The period of measurements was not consistent between years so the date label
tick spacing and the range are different between years. Large data gaps correspond to when the ship was in port between cruise legs or data
outages. An alternate version of this ﬁgure where the y axes are not normalized between years is included in the Supplement (Fig. S7).
visited multiple times, such as the Cambridge Bay in 2016
(SST(1 m) trend of +0.11 ◦C d−1 from 5 to 10 August 2016),
or were sampled for a continuous period, such as the Queen
Maud Gulf in 2019 (SST(1 m) trend of +0.64 ◦C d−1 from
13 to 19 August 2019) (Fig. 4b). Some of the sub-regions
were considerably warmer than others (e.g. Bathurst Inlet
was 2.82 ◦C warmer in 2017 and 1.51 ◦C warmer in 2018
compared to the measurement averages for those respective
years), whereas other regions were consistently colder (e.g.
Queen Maud Gulf was 3.45 ◦C colder in 2017 and 0.76 ◦C
colder compared to the measurement averages for those re-
spective years) (Table 1).
There was large interannual variability in surface salinity;
for example, average observed salinity in 2019 was 20.12
compared with 24.82 in 2018 (Fig. 4c). Salinity values were
much lower in Chantrey Inlet in 2017 (16.61) and Bathurst
Inlet in both 2017 (20.78) and 2018 (21.86) relative to the
salinities in other regions in those years (Table 1). Salin-
ity ranges on the order of ∼10 were observed between re-
gions in all years, for example in 2018 the maximum salin-
ity range was 10.84. The salinity data are marked by rapid
changes of ∼5 that did not coincide with equivalent tem-
perature changes (Fig. 4c); these salinity transitions are ev-
ident in the 2017 and 2018 Bathurst Inlet data, much of the
Cambridge Bay data, and the Wellington Bay data from 2016
and 2019. There is evidence of freshening in Wellington Bay
from 2 to 4 August 2016 (salinity trend of −0.87 d−1) and
in Queen Maud Gulf in 2019 (salinity trend of 0.11 d−1 from
the 13 to 19 August 2019), but there does not appear to be a
seasonal freshening trend in 2017 or 2018.
There was high interannual pCO2 (sw) variability (Ta-
ble 1), and average measured pCO2 (sw) was supersatu-
rated (445 µatm) in 2016, undersaturated in 2017 (361 µatm)
and 2019 (373 µatm), and highly undersaturated in 2018
(288 µatm) (Fig. 4d). There was also high regional variabil-
ity in pCO2 (sw) each year; for example, in 2018 pCO2 (sw)
Ocean Sci., 19, 837–856, 2023
https://doi.org/10.5194/os-19-837-2023

R. P. Sims et al.: High interannual surface pCO2 variability in the southern Canadian
845
ranged from 218 µatm to 387 µatm (Table 1). There were
identiﬁable trends in pCO2 (sw) across all regions in 2018
and 2019 (Fig. 4d); for example, pCO2 (sw) increased
by 2.22 µatm d−1 from 31 July to 21 August 2018 and
4.04 µatm d−1 from 9 to 21 August 2019. In all 4 years,
Cambridge Bay had lower pCO2 (sw) relative to the other
regions; for example, the average pCO2(sw) in Cambridge
Bay in 2019 was 359 µatm, whereas the averages in the
Finlayson Islands and Queen Maud Gulf were 392 µatm
and 370 µatm, respectively (Table 1). Low pCO2 (sw) val-
ues were also seen in Bathurst Inlet (e.g. 359 µatm in 2017),
Chantrey Inlet (e.g. 326 µatm in 2017) and Wellington Bay
(e.g. 268 µatm in 2018) (Table 1) Many low-pCO2 (sw) re-
gions were also low-salinity regions, e.g. Chantrey Inlet and
Wellington Bay in 2017 (Table 1). Fluorescence was gen-
erally low throughout all the cruises in all years, except
for the relatively high ﬂuorescence signal in Bathurst In-
let and around the Finlayson Islands (Fig. 4e). The air–
sea CO2 ﬂux (Fig. 4g) reﬂects the trends in the predictor
variables, particularly pCO2 (sw) and U10 (Fig. 4d and f).
The air–sea ﬂux calculated in 2016 was 3.58 mmol m−2 d−1,
reﬂecting the fact that the pCO2 (sw) was supersaturated.
In 2017 and 2019 surface ocean pCO2 (sw) was quite un-
dersaturated (361 and 373 µatm respectively), the 2017
ﬂux was larger (−2.96 mmol m−2 d−1) than the 2019 ﬂux
(−0.57 mmol m−2 d−1) as the wind speed was very low in
2019 (3.1 m s−1). As pCO2 (sw) was highly undersaturated
(288 µatm) in 2018, there was a large ﬂux into the ocean
−16.79 mmol m−2 d−1.
4
Discussion
Presented in the results above are the multiyear summer-
time pCO2 (sw) observations made on RV Martin Bergmann.
These data reveal the spatial and interannual variability of
pCO2 (sw) throughout the open-water season in the Kitikmeot
Sea. To maximize the value of the pCO2 (sw) observations
made on RV Martin Bergmann, we will now present and dis-
cuss these new measurements alongside previous measure-
ments and in the context of our current understanding of the
carbonate system in the region.
4.1
Local scale – comparisons with the ocean carbon
observatories
The two local observatories, the ONC mooring in Cambridge
Bay and the Qikirtaarjuk Island observatory (Fig. 1), provide
measurements throughout the year that are not possible with
shipboard observations. The pCO2 (sw) values are directly
measured on the ONC mooring, whereas pCO2 (sw) is cal-
culated from the ﬂux derived using measurements from the
Qikirtaarjuk Island observatory eddy covariance “EC tower”.
Using the pCO2 (sw) observations from these two observato-
ries alongside the new RV Martin Bergmann measurements
allows us to construct a multiyear timeline of pCO2 (sw) in
the region (Fig. 5). It should be noted that the three measure-
ment sources in Fig. 5 are not co-located, the Qikirtaarjuk
Island observatory on the Finlayson Islands is 35 km west of
the ONC mooring (Fig. 1) and the Bergmann measurements
span a slightly wider area (Fig. 2). Despite the spatial dispar-
ity in these measurements, it should be acknowledged that
for calculations of global CO2 ﬂux on a 1◦×1◦grid, the ma-
jority of these measurements would fall within the same grid
cell. It might be expected that on these sorts of spatial scales
the measurements should agree closely, but that is not always
the case (Fig. 5).
The RV Martin Bergmann pCO2 (sw) data are lower in
2017 (Fig. 5b) and 2018 (Fig. 5c) relative to the values pre-
dicted from the EC tower, even when measurements were
made in the footprint of the EC tower. For example, from
18:30 to 23:10 on 3 August 2017, pCO2 (sw) from the EC
tower was 415 µatm, while from RV Martin Bergmann it was
390 µatm; however, from 05:50 to 06:40 on 1 August 2018,
pCO2 (sw) from the EC tower was 409 µatm, while from RV
Martin Bergmann it was 262 µatm. Accounting for a ther-
mal skin temperature of 0.17 ◦C in the RV Martin Bergmann
data only alters the pCO2 (sw) by about ∼3 µatm based on
the 4.23 % ◦C−1 Takahashi et al. (1993) constant. For the RV
Martin Bergmann pCO2 (sw) to match values from the EC
tower, based on the 4.23 % ◦C−1 constant the SST at the sur-
face would need to be 1.46 ◦C greater at the surface on 3
August 2017 and 10.52 ◦C greater at the surface on 1 Au-
gust 2018 than measured by RV Martin Bergmann at 1 m.
Modelling results do not support the existence of temper-
ature differences of a magnitude that can account for the
pCO2 (sw) difference on 3 August 2017 (Xu et al., 2021).
It is possible that the SST measured from the 13 m moor-
ing that is used to calculate pCO2 is not representative of
the surface interface, which would bias the Schmidt num-
ber and k0 used in the calculation of pCO2 (sw) from the EC
tower; yet, even if this were the case, the magnitude of the
impact can not explain the larger pCO2 (sw) differences be-
tween the methods (146 µatm). Even though the RV Martin
Bergmann measurements are being made close to the surface
(at a depth of 1 m), the most likely explanation for the dif-
ferences in pCO2 (sw) between the two methods is surface
stratiﬁcation in this upper metre. The impact of surface strat-
iﬁcation on pCO2 (sw) has been observed elsewhere in the
Arctic (Ahmed et al., 2020; Dong et al., 2021b), including
for cases where differences can be up to 200 µatm (Miller
et al., 2018). Surface stratiﬁcation in the Kitikmeot Sea is
caused by melting of ﬁrst-year sea ice and the large freshwa-
ter input by rivers (rivers alone can contribute an estimated
70 cm of freshwater to the surface annually; Williams et al.,
2018). The fact that the EC tower pCO2 (sw) was higher than
the RV Martin Bergmann pCO2 (sw) would suggest that this
is due to river induced stratiﬁcation, as Arctic riverine water
is typically higher in pCO2 (sw) (Cai et al., 2010), indeed this
was true between the 30 June and 2 July 2017 for Freshwa-
https://doi.org/10.5194/os-19-837-2023
Ocean Sci., 19, 837–856, 2023

846
R. P. Sims et al.: High interannual surface pCO2 variability in the southern Canadian
Table 1. Underway surface ocean (1 m) observation summary table for the RV Martin Bergmann cruises from 2016 through 2019. Geo-
graphical sub-regions are deﬁned in Fig. 4a. The top row for each item is the mean ± 1 standard deviation, while the bottom row is the
measurement range. Table averages are the average of all the observations for each variable for each year and have not been scaled to the
spatial extent of each region.
Year
Sub-region
No of observations
SST(1m)
Salinity
pCO2(sw)
Fluorescence
U10
Flux
(◦C)
(µatm)
(m s−1)
(mmol m−2 d−1)
2016
Dease Strait west
376
7.62 ± 0.75
23.58 ± 1.54
490.66 ± 46.38
–
4.25 ± 2.31
4.37 ± 1.71
4.71–8.50
17.74–26.08
411.51–567.38
1.12–7.22
0.64–8.77
Wellington Bay
1523
6.35 ± 1.10
22.37 ± 3.11
455.98 ± 26.26
–
6.05 ± 2.23
5.32 ± 3.50
3.68–8.66
12.21–26.84
393.24–510.08
0.58–8.91
−0.23–15.19
Finlayson Islands
412
6.30 ± 1.46
25.67 ± 1.77
471.05 ± 40.86
–
2.19 ± 0.59
1.23 ± 0.99
3.32–8.25
21.01–28.57
383.13–560.18
1.55–2.92
−0.15–3.38
Cambridge Bay
2051
5.18 ± 1.38
24.42 ± 2.29
423.87 ± 43.44
–
4.22 ± 2.69
2.24 ± 4.45
3.18–12.13
18.06–27.51
347.40–656.73
1.50–10.37
−7.23–32.88
Queen Maud Gulf
1173
5.38 ± 0.56
24.61 ± 1.54
444.26 ± 57.26
–
5.93 ± 1.08
4.24 ± 4.00
4.22–7.14
20.71–27.37
372.35–749.17
1.55–6.97
−2.02–24.30
Average all
5535
5.80 ± 1.34
23.93 ± 2.57
445.08 ± 47.37
–
4.94 ± 2.45
3.58 ± 4.08
3.18–12.13
12.21–28.57
347.40 –749.17
0.58–10.37
−7.23–32.88
2017
Bathurst Inlet
7426
11.24 ± 1.90
20.78 ± 2.04
358.80 ± 16.47
0.32 ± 0.12
4.54 ± 2.22
−2.11 ± 1.87
8.56–21.14
11.04–23.88
291.75–407.48
0.10–0.71
0.38–10.91
−10.32–0.70
Dease Strait west
1137
8.27 ± 1.93
23.21 ± 1.59
367.92 ± 6.24
0.18 ± 0.07
6.89 ± 2.32
−3.83 ± 2.24
3.40–10.60
14.63–26.04
352.31–420.93
0.04–0.29
0.30–11.43
−9.31–2.55
Wellington Bay
847
5.04 ± 0.76
20.08 ± 4.60
361.68 ± 15.08
0.14 ± 0.03
1.27 ± 0.60
−0.28 ± 0.24
3.55–7.20
14.23–27.22
334.16–459.24
0.07–0.22
0.29–3.12
−1.38–0.34
Finlayson Islands
3491
6.95 ± 0.83
25.18 ± 1.38
372.81 ± 15.10
0.20 ± 0.06
4.53 ± 2.31
−2.10 ± 2.12
3.08–9.39
19.86–27.60
324.66–478.13
0.04–0.42
0.43–11.12
−11.51–0.70
Cambridge Bay
1951
6.47 ± 0.73
26.14 ± 1.48
350.80 ± 27.19
0.15 ± 0.06
5.05 ± 2.46
−4.08 ± 4.61
3.63–9.99
17.09–28.14
294.77–506.91
0.00–0.36
0.43–10.69
−18.76–15.80
Queen Maud Gulf
1519
4.97 ± 1.23
27.25 ± 1.05
378.39 ± 11.69
0.17 ± 0.03
6.64 ± 2.28
−1.97 ± 1.73
2.78–7.50
24.58–28.31
346.81–422.62
0.07–0.32
0.29–9.46
−7.11–1.76
Chantrey Inlet
1102
4.97 ± 0.40
16.61 ± 0.57
325.91 ± 34.66
0.23 ± 0.06
8.33 ± 1.15
−11.60 ± 4.49
4.09–5.76
15.45–18.25
280.74–403.54
0.07–0.34
5.69–10.73
−20.77–1.16
Average all
17473
8.42 ± 2.95
22.68 ± 3.51
361.07 ± 22.20
0.24 ± 0.12
5.02 ± 2.59
−2.96 ± 3.55
2.78–21.14
11.04–28.31
280.74–506.91
0.00–0.71
0.29–11.43
−20.77–15.80
2018
Bathurst Inlet
3215
5.80 ± 0.91
21.86 ± 1.91
305.39 ± 5.79
0.37 ± 0.15
8.89 ± 2.27
−17.58 ± 8.01
2.84–7.51
19.81–27.52
293.75–322.70
−0.01–0.84
4.79–14.69
−42.85 – −5.30
Dease Strait West
1516
3.28 ± 1.80
26.83 ± 1.01
298.91 ± 18.93
0.39 ± 0.25
8.38 ± 3.07
−17.89 ± 10.91
−1.29–6.03
24.42–28.50
250.68–386.92
0.06–1.30
1.88–13.16
−44.92 – −0.60
Wellington Bay
1414
3.03 ± 1.21
26.73 ± 0.80
268.16 ± 8.60
0.20 ± 0.11
6.85 ± 2.12
−17.72 ± 7.68
1.23–6.13
24.48–27.93
253.76–294.05
−0.16–0.46
0.28–11.90
−42.44 – −7.81
Finlayson Islands
1352
3.23 ± 1.47
26.62 ± 1.02
284.96 ± 16.21
0.24 ± 0.11
8.29 ± 2.36
−21.20 ± 8.83
0.47–5.82
24.68–28.07
248.81–317.35
−0.07–0.62
1.41–12.32
−46.82 – −7.29
Cambridge Bay
972
5.02 ± 1.88
23.80 ± 3.11
253.52 ± 20.43
0.21 ± 0.11
6.23 ± 1.98
−15.35 ± 9.89
1.34–8.14
17.66–27.95
217.83–301.45
−0.27–0.62
2.33–11.76
−51.97 – −2.72
Queen Maud Gulf
1043
3.53 ± 0.89
27.06 ± 1.17
286.50 ± 15.82
0.18 ± 0.13
4.70 ± 1.66
−7.58 ± 5.98
1.87–5.72
21.56–28.20
250.61–310.12
−0.19–0.45
1.61–10.31
−34.36 – −0.99
Average all
9512
4.29 ± 1.79
24.82 ± 2.83
288.55 ± 22.12
0.29 ± 0.18
7.70 ± 2.71
−16.79 ± 9.34
−1.29–8.14
17.66–28.50
217.83–386.92
−0.27–1.30
0.28–14.69
−51.97 – −0.60
2019
Wellington Bay
718
6.78 ± 0.97
19.81 ± 1.79
353.43 ± 14.76
0.22 ± 0.02
1.92 ± 0.70
−0.62 ± 0.25
3.81–8.56
16.08–23.35
320.60–394.70
0.17–0.28
0.64–2.64
−1.03 – −0.01
Finlayson Islands
2870
7.37 ± 0.96
21.72 ± 1.24
392.03 ± 18.97
0.20 ± 0.04
4.82 ± 2.35
0.02 ± 0.49
4.74–9.65
18.13–24.21
320.90–427.40
0.11–0.31
0.64–7.47
−1.89–2.35
Cambridge Bay
1097
7.20 ± 0.55
20.03 ± 2.05
359.27 ± 17.62
0.21 ± 0.04
2.63 ± 1.46
−0.95 ± 0.89
5.21–8.81
12.23–22.61
308.66–418.43
0.08–0.32
0.71–4.50
−3.20–0.21
Queen Maud Gulf
6192
6.72 ± 1.29
19.47 ± 1.79
369.83 ± 11.04
0.26 ± 0.07
2.60 ± 1.44
−0.75 ± 0.62
2.86–8.81
13.07–24.54
327.32–404.64
0.11–0.52
0.10–5.87
−3.41–0.10
Average all
11058
6.96 ± 1.16
20.12 ± 1.93
373.37 ± 18.75
0.24 ± 0.07
3.13 ± 1.96
−0.57 ± 0.69
2.86–9.65
12.23–24.54
308.66–427.40
0.08–0.52
0.10–7.47
−3.41–2.35
Ocean Sci., 19, 837–856, 2023
https://doi.org/10.5194/os-19-837-2023

R. P. Sims et al.: High interannual surface pCO2 variability in the southern Canadian
847
Figure 5. Surface pCO2(sw) from across the Kitikmeot Sea made in (a) 2016, (b) 2017 and (c) 2018. The pCO2(sw) measurements from
the ONC mooring are shown as red dots, all pCO2(sw) measurements from the RV Martin Bergmann are shown as blue dots and pCO2(sw)
measurements inferred from eddy covariance at the Qikirtaarjuk Island observatory are shown as a black line.
ter Creek (Manning et al., 2020). Interestingly, the predicted
pCO2 (sw) from the EC tower shows a peak in early Au-
gust 2017 and a downwards trend through to the end of Au-
gust, something that is also seen in the ship-based pCO2 (sw)
observations (Fig. 5b). Similarly, the predicted pCO2 (sw)
from the EC tower increases in August 2018 at a similar
rate to the increase seen in the shipboard pCO2 (sw) observa-
tions (2.22 µatm d−1; Fig. 5c). The fact that similar trends can
be observed in the RV Martin Bergmann and the EC tower
pCO2 (sw) does suggest that seasonal trends in the region
are detectable with both methods. However, the general dis-
agreement between the RV Martin Bergmann measurements
and those from the EC tower highlights the need for year-
round pCO2 (sw) observations in the ﬂux footprint of the EC
tower. Additionally, interfacial pCO2 (sw) measurements and
vertical proﬁles may help reconcile the observed disparities
seen between the two measurement sources of data.
There is good agreement in the pCO2 (sw) values between
the EC tower and the ONC mooring in May, June and Octo-
ber 2017 (Fig. 5b) and in May and June 2018 (Fig. 5c). The
breakdown of stratiﬁcation at the end of the ice-free summer
period and over the winter (Xu et al., 2021) may explain the
good agreement between the EC tower and the ONC mooring
at these times. In June 2017, the two systems diverge. Specif-
ically, the pCO2 (sw) at the ONC mooring decreases due to a
spring bloom (Duke et al., 2021), whereas pCO2 (sw) from
the EC tower is not impacted, as the bloom in Cambridge
Bay is caused by wastewater discharge (Back et al., 2021) it
might be expected that this signal would not detectable at the
EC tower.
There appears to be some agreement between the data RV
collected by Martin Bergmann and the ONC mooring in the
summer of 2016. Unfortunately, the servicing period of the
ONC mooring overlapped with the RV Martin Bergmann
cruise dates, meaning there was no period of direct overlap
between the two data sets. The four periods when the RV
Martin Bergmann was moored up within 0.5 km of the moor-
ing were from 5 August 2016 at 05:20 to 5 August 2016 at
11:10, 7 August 2016 at 05:40 to 8 August 2016 at 01:20,
9 August 2016 at 08:20 to 9 August 2016 at 14:30, and
10 August 2016 at 00:50 to 10 August 2016 at 21:40, the av-
erage pCO2 (sw) values were 433, 421, 406 and 406 µatm, re-
spectively. pCO2 (sw) at the ONC mooring on 3 August 2016
at 10:00 was 326 µatm, and on 12 August 2016 at 12:40 it was
371 µatm. Disagreement between the ONC mooring and the
RV Martin Bergmann here may be due to the different intake
depths of the two systems. Stratiﬁcation may mean the ONC
mooring is not always representative of pCO2 (sw) closer to
the air–sea interface, especially during parts of ice-free pe-
riod; however, CTD proﬁles from 2018 do indicate there is
stratiﬁcation in the surface 10 m in the summer (Back et al.,
2021). The spring 2016 measurements from the ONC moor-
ing show that pCO2 (sw) was high in the spring leading into
the summer ﬁeld season, and the trend towards increasing
pCO2 (sw) due to warming was captured in August 2016 by
both the ONC mooring and the RV Martin Bergmann obser-
vations.
Combining the data sources in this way highlights the
value of having these different observatories to look at multi-
year changes. The observatories provide context to the vari-
ability in the summertime pCO2 (sw) measurements from lo-
cal ships. The intermittence of the measurements from the
ONC mooring and the Qikirtaarjuk Island observatory re-
ﬂects the challenges in making these novel measurements
in an extreme environment. Knowledge about how to oper-
ate both observatories and prevent instrument outages means
https://doi.org/10.5194/os-19-837-2023
Ocean Sci., 19, 837–856, 2023

848
R. P. Sims et al.: High interannual surface pCO2 variability in the southern Canadian
that future measurements will build towards much needed
continuous and complementary multiyear datasets.
4.2
Regional scales – spatial variability in the
underway data
Focusing back on the RV Martin Bergmann data, there is
clear evidence of spatial regional variability in the underway
data. The pCO2 (sw) values were typically lower by ∼20–
40 µatm in the small bays (Cambridge Bay, Wellington Bay)
and larger inlets surveyed (Bathurst Inlet, Chantrey Inlet)
compared to the central channel (e.g. Dease Strait west, the
Finlayson Islands and Queen Maud Gulf) (Table 1). The rea-
son for relatively low pCO2 (sw) in the bays and inlets is not
readily apparent. Using the 4.23 % ◦C−1 constant from Taka-
hashi et al. (1993) it is possible to test whether the pattern of
lower pCO2 (sw) in the bays and inlets was driven by tem-
perature; for a representative 360 µatm value for pCO2 (sw)
to be ∼20–40 µatm lower it would need to be between 1.35
and 2.78 ◦C colder. Rather than being colder, many of these
regions, such as Bathurst Inlet, were warmer, and based on
the Takahashi et al. (1993) constant they would thus have a
predicted higher pCO2 (sw). Although the ﬂuorescence sen-
sor was not calibrated against in situ measurements, the ﬂu-
orescence signal was consistent with previous measurements
that showed the region to have widespread low primary pro-
duction at the surface (Martin et al., 2013). In spite of the
lack of high surface chlorophyll a concentrations, biological
production at depth cannot be ruled out as an explanation for
lower pCO2 (sw) in the bays. For example, wastewater dis-
charge has been shown to cause a deep (20–30 m) chloro-
phyll bloom in Cambridge Bay (Back et al., 2021). A large
under-ice (Arrigo et al., 2012; Mundy et al., 2009) or ice edge
(Perrette et al., 2011) phytoplankton bloom earlier in the sea-
son could also explain lower summertime pCO2 (sw) values
in these bays and inlets. It is also possible that these regional
differences are driven by regional freshwater inputs; all four
identiﬁed regions are fed by rivers and there are sharp salin-
ity transitions of ∼5 that point to the existence of mixing
and fronts (Fig. 4c). Rivers are typically thought to be highly
supersaturated in pCO2 (sw) in the Arctic due to organic mat-
ter breakdown (Teodoru et al., 2009), potentially contributing
to higher pCO2 (sw) in these bays and inlets. However, whilst
local rivers are high in pCO2 (sw) (Manning et al., 2020), they
are typically unbuffered and thus have much lower DIC rel-
ative to seawater. Whilst the average values for riverine TA
(565 µmol kg−1) and DIC (533 µmol kg−1) in the CAA are
low, maximum measured values for TA (2272 µmol kg−1)
and DIC (2252 µmol kg−1) can be as high or higher than
in seawater, depending on the bedrock type underlying the
drainage basin (Brown et al., 2020). Dilution by ice meltwa-
ter that is low in pCO2 (sw) does lower pCO2 (sw) (Cai et al.,
2010; Meire et al., 2015), so it may be that sea ice meltwa-
ter in these bays and inlets may be contributing to the lower
observed pCO2 (sw).
The ONC mooring is located in Cambridge Bay in shallow
water (sensor depth 7 m). At this depth the mooring is not im-
pacted by the Freshwater Creek plume, which is detectable at
< 2 m (Duke et al., 2021; Manning et al., 2020). It is still un-
clear how much of an impact being located in the bay has
on the representativeness of these measurements for the Ki-
tikmeot region. As the RV Martin Bergmann travelled into
and out of the bay multiple times during the 4 years of ob-
servations, differences in pCO2 (sw) measured in the bay and
outside the bay may help identify whether the ONC moor-
ing site is representative of the region as a whole. All tran-
sects into and out of Cambridge Bay are shown in Fig. 6.
Two sub-regions are designated, inside the bay and outside
the bay; here pCO2 (sw) from the RV Martin Bergmann was
averaged every 2 d for which there were data available (Ta-
ble 2). As seen in Table 2, pCO2 (sw) was similar (typi-
cally <± 15 µatm) inside and outside of the bay. On 17 Au-
gust 2017, pCO2 (sw) was much higher (39.6 µatm) in the bay.
As measurements are similar before (8–9 August 2016) and
after (19–20 August), it would appear that this difference is
caused by a process only occurring in the bay and possibly
related to the river plume. Overall, the agreement between
the measurements inside and outside of the Bay is encour-
aging and suggests that pCO2 (sw) in Cambridge Bay at least
broadly agrees with that in the main channel. Without more
information, it is difﬁcult to conclude whether the mooring
is truly representative of the wider Kitikmeot Sea.
4.3
Interannual variability and large-scale seasonal
trends
We have identiﬁed local-scale differences between the
pCO2 (sw) values from the RV Martin Bergmann, the ONC
and the Qikirtaarjuk Island observatories and regional scales
differences between the bays and inlets and the main chan-
nel. However, large differences in the RV Martin Bergmann
pCO2 (sw) values occurred between years. The measurement
start date of all four cruises spanned a very short window of
10 d (2 August 2016, 2 August 2017, 31 July 2018, 9 Au-
gust 2019). Ahmed et al. (2019) have established the impor-
tance of the timing of sea ice breakup on pCO2 (sw) values in
the CAA. During our study, ice breakup began ∼2–6 weeks
before the start of these cruises (4 July 2016, 22 June 2017,
15 July 2018, 14 July 2019), which we interpret as exerting
one of the main controls on the interannual variability in the
RV Martin Bergmann pCO2 (sw) data.
The very low pCO2 (sw) values (289 µatm) observed in
2018 (Table 1) could be caused by a combination of low
SST(1 m), springtime CO2 depletion by primary production,
and recent dilution by sea ice melt (Else et al., 2012; Ahmed
et al., 2021; Geilfus et al., 2015) or river runoff (Cai et al.,
2010), yet we cannot say with certainty which of these pro-
cesses was most important in producing these low pCO2 (sw)
values. As the ice breakup was late in 2018 (resulting in sam-
ples collected shortly after breakup), it can be assumed that
Ocean Sci., 19, 837–856, 2023
https://doi.org/10.5194/os-19-837-2023

R. P. Sims et al.: High interannual surface pCO2 variability in the southern Canadian
849
Figure 6. Zoomed in view showing the location of all the pCO2(sw) transects (green) measured in and out of Cambridge Bay during the 4
years of transects. The regions used to deﬁne regions inside the bay and outside the bay are shown as a red and blue box, respectively.
Table 2. Average pCO2(sw) measured by the RV Martin Bergmann inside and outside of Cambridge Bay.
Date
pCO2(sw) inside
pCO2(sw) outside
pCO2(sw) difference
Cambridge Bay
Cambridge Bay
(inside bay–
outside bay)
5 August 2016
482.5
450.9
31.6
7 to 8 August 2016
468.2
456.1
12.1
9 to 10 August 2016
467.4
457.7
9.7
4 to 5 August 2017
375.1
371.0
4.1
6 to 7 August 2017
374.2
370.2
4.0
8 to 9 August 2017
356.0
362.1
−6.1
17 August 2017
420.9
381.3
39.6
19 to 20 August 2017
371.2
374.8
−3.6
29 August 2017
376.7
381.0
−4.3
31 July to 1 August 2018
221.5
231.3
−9.8
2 to 3 August 2018
251.9
246.1
5.8
8 August 2018
219.2
221.5
−2.3
9 August 2019
311.8
326.7
−14.9
18 to 19 August 2019
360.3
364.0
−3.7
21 August 2019
345.1
348.2
−3.1
surface ocean CO2 exchange with the atmosphere was lim-
ited by the ice cover until just before these measurements
were made, as sea ice is essentially impermeable to gases
(Loose et al., 2011; Butterworth and Else, 2018). Addition-
ally, the presence of sea ice through to the end of July in
2018 meant there was far less warming of the surface seawa-
ter (average SST(1 m) = 4.32 ◦C); this explanation rules out
surface cooling lowering SST(1 m) and thus pCO2(sw). Light
penetrating through sea ice between March and June could
have driven primary production below and within the ice
(Else et al., 2019). Indeed, an increase in under-ice chloro-
phyll a concentration, together with a draw-down of sur-
face nutrients between April to June 2018, indicates under-
ice phytoplankton production during this period (Dalman et
al., 2019). However, chlorophyll a concentrations did not ex-
ceed 0.6 µg L−1, as production is limited by surface nutrient
availability in the region (Back et al., 2021). It is likely that
the melting sea ice stratiﬁed the surface and diluted surface
pCO2 (sw) as has been observed in other parts of the Arc-
tic (Miller et al., 2018; Ahmed et al., 2020); low surface
ocean salinity values in the ﬁrst weeks of the survey support
this. Measurements several weeks into the 2018 cruise show
that pCO2 (sw) increased quickly in the following weeks (to
∼300 µatm), likely due to a combination of air–sea exchange
https://doi.org/10.5194/os-19-837-2023
Ocean Sci., 19, 837–856, 2023

850
R. P. Sims et al.: High interannual surface pCO2 variability in the southern Canadian
and the observed surface warming. Interestingly, Ahmed et
al. (2019) did not observe pCO2 (sw) values below 300 µatm
at any point during the 5 years of passing through the Kitik-
meot Sea. Therefore, 2018 could be an anomalously low year
for pCO2 (sw) or the discrepancy could highlight the fact that
Ahmed et al. (2019) did not make any measurements imme-
diately after sea ice breakup in this region. Furthermore, the
discrepancy could be inﬂuenced by the difference in sam-
pling depth of the two pCO2 systems between the CCGS
Amundsen (7 m) and RV Martin Bergmann (1 m). The best
way to assess the impact of the sampling depth would be to
take simultaneous measurements via the ships intake and at
the interface as in Ho and Schanze (2020).
The processes driving the changes in pCO2 (sw) that have
been discussed above can be partially quantiﬁed using back
of the envelope calculations with several assumptions. The
individual impact on pCO2 (sw) of dilution by melting sea
ice, air–sea gas exchange, net community production (NCP)
and warming of seawater are explored across the region for
the month of August in 2018.
Firstly, the impact of dilution by sea ice melt can be
tested by assuming conservative mixing of TA, DIC and
salinity as in (Meire et al., 2015). For the seawater mix-
ing endmember, surface TA (2034.43 µmo kg−1) and DIC
(1958.82 µmol kg−1), SST (−1.38 ◦C), and salinity (28.64)
are taken from seawater bottle data on 18 June 2018 (Duke et
al., 2021) alongside surface silicate (4 µmol L−1) and phos-
phate (0.5 µmol L−1) from 2018 (Back et al., 2021). Aver-
age values from spring 2019 for TA (356.60 µmol kg−1), DIC
(340.24 µmol kg−1) and salinity (4.56) in ﬁrst-year sea ice
are used for the sea ice mixing endmember (Else et al., 2022).
Taking a sea ice thickness of 1.8 m and assuming water ex-
pands 10% when it freezes to form sea ice would suggest
melting all the sea ice would add 1.64 m of water to reach
the ﬁnal salinity of 24.82 (the average recorded value from
the RV Martin Bergmann measurements) and conservation
of salinity would require this freshwater to be mixed with
8.68 m of seawater. The ratio of these two depths can then be
used to provide the predicted TA (1768.26 µmol kg−1) and
DIC (1702.05 µmol kg−1) for the seawater at a salinity of
24.82. Using CO2SYS v1.1 (Lewis et al., 1998; Van Heuven
et al., 2011; Sharp et al., 2020) the calculated pCO2 (sw) value
for the initial seawater condition is 369 µatm, and after the
melting of sea ice pCO2 (sw) is 302 µatm. The dissociation
constants of carbonic acid used in the CO2SYS calculations
were those by Mehrbach (1973) and reﬁt by Dickson and
Millero (1987), and the HSO−
4 dissociation constants were
from Dickson (1990). For these calculations temperature was
kept constant. As the average measured pCO2 was 289 µatm
in 2018, sea ice melt and conservative mixing of seawater can
account for the majority (66.75 µatm) of the total change in
pCO2 (80 µatm) from the initial seawater conditions in 2018.
Secondly, using the same approach as DeGrandpre et
al. (2020) an estimate of the individual and combined im-
pact of air–sea exchange and NCP on pCO2 (sw) can be made
using a simple model with the following assumptions: an av-
erage ﬂux from the 2018 cruise of −16.79 mmol m−2 d−1; a
40 m mixed-layer depth for Dease Strait (Xu et al., 2021),
with a density of 996.49 kg m−3 from SST (−1.38 ◦C)
and salinity (28.64); and an upper estimate of NCP
(6.63 g C m−2), which is the average integrated rate for Cam-
bridge Bay during the open water season of 2018 (Back
et al., 2021). With this conﬁguration a change in DIC
(+0.0176 µmol kg−1 h−1) due to air–sea exchange and NCP
(−0.003 µmol kg−1 h−1) can be calculated. Taking the com-
bined change in DIC (+0.0142 µmol kg−1 h−1) and substi-
tuting it into CO2SYS (Van Heuven et al., 2011; Lewis et al.,
1998) with the same initial TA, DIC, silicate and phosphate
concentrations as on the 18 June 2018 produces a pCO2 (sw)
change of 0.0459 µatm h−1. Scaling this DIC change for the
month of August with no other changes in the system would
increase pCO2 (sw) by 36.31 µatm (with NCP component
reducing pCO2 (sw) by 9.4 µatm, and the air–sea exchange
component would increase pCO2 (sw) by 47.34 µatm).
Thirdly, using the 4.23 % ◦C−1 Takahashi et al. (1993)
constant, the impact of the 0.078 ◦C d−1 warming trend on
pCO2 (sw) can be calculated for the 22 d period from 31 July
to 22 August 2018. Using the average pCO2 (sw) value of
289 µatm and SST(1 m) of 4.32 ◦C, an increase in temper-
ature of 1.72 ◦C would predict a pCO2 (sw) of 310 µatm.
This increase of 21.78 µatm is less than the 22 d increase of
48.84 µatm based on the 2.22 µatm d−1 trend in the 2018 RV
Martin Bergmann data. From this, the impact of warming can
account for just under half of the change in pCO2 (sw), and
the rest of the increase in pCO2 (sw) could be due to air–sea
gas exchange.
To
summarize,
modelling
the
processes
impacting
pCO2 (sw) can account for much of the observed changes in
pCO2 (sw) in 2018. Sea ice melt can account for a 66.75 µatm
decrease in pCO2 (sw), which is equivalent to 83 % of the ob-
served change. The warming of seawater by 1.72 ◦C in the
ﬁrst 22 d of August would increase pCO2 (sw) by 21.78 µatm.
Air–sea gas exchange can account for a 47.34 µatm increase
in pCO2 (sw) in the month of August (34.72 µatm if scaled
to the ﬁrst 22 d). NCP can account for a 9.4 µatm decrease
in pCO2 (sw) in August (−6.7 µatm if scaled to the ﬁrst
22 d). The actual observed change in pCO2 (sw) in the ﬁrst
22 d of August was 48.77 µatm, which is extremely close to
the combined pCO2 (sw) change from these three processes
48.68 µatm.
While not as heavily undersaturated as in 2018, pCO2 (sw)
was still undersaturated with respect to atmospheric values
in both 2017 and 2019. In these 2 years, measurements were
made ∼4–8 weeks after sea ice breakup and pCO2 (sw) val-
ues were in the ∼350–390 µatm range. Having been ice free
for longer, SST(1 m) was 3–4 ◦C warmer in 2017 and 2019,
which accounts for much of the pCO2 (sw) difference relative
to 2018. Increased SST(1 m) in 2017 and 2019 and a gradual
increase in surface salinity in 2019 mirror the seasonal trends
seen in Ahmed et al. (2019) where the CAA becomes saltier
Ocean Sci., 19, 837–856, 2023
https://doi.org/10.5194/os-19-837-2023

R. P. Sims et al.: High interannual surface pCO2 variability in the southern Canadian
851
and warmer over the summer. The 2017 and 2019 pCO2 (sw)
values are similar but still slightly lower than the pCO2 (sw)
values observed in Coronation Gulf by Ahmed et al. (2019),
which again likely reﬂects the slightly earlier sampling pe-
riod of this study, where undersaturated surface waters that
have recently become ice free have not had long to equili-
brate with the atmosphere or warm up.
Measured
pCO2 (sw)
was
much
higher
in
2016
(445.08 µatm) compared to 2017 and 2019 around 4
weeks after sea ice breakup. Ahmed et al. (2019) also
observed similar pCO2 supersaturation (464.5 µatm) in the
region in 2016 when they made their observations ∼2 weeks
later. pCO2 (sw) supersaturation requires either the upwelling
of high pCO2 (sw) deep waters, net heterotrophy, or for
pCO2 (sw) to be close to equilibrium with the atmosphere
and then for the seawater to subsequently warm (Chierici
et al., 2011). The most plausible of these is the warming of
the surface waters. However, if SST(1 m) variability was the
main factor controlling pCO2 (sw), it is not apparent why
there would be supersaturation in 2016 but not in 2017 and
2019, which were both warmer years. The sea ice breakup
time in 2016 was similar to both 2017 and 2019, suggesting
that the timing of breakup was also not the only determining
factor. We propose that the high pCO2 (sw) values observed
in 2016 may point to the importance of surface pCO2 (sw)
values set in the previous autumn and wintertime modulation
of pCO2 (sw). To determine what processes are altering
pCO2 (sw) between summertime ﬁeld seasons would require
year-round sampling or a biogeochemical model run over
multiple years, which are outside of the scope of this paper.
Clearly, many interacting processes are involved in de-
termining surface ocean pCO2 (sw) values in the Kitikmeot
Sea, and as such predicting surface ocean pCO2 (sw) in this
region is difﬁcult. Ahmed et al. (2019) proposed a model
for pCO2 (sw) in the CAA as a function of weeks since ice
breakup, their model underestimated pCO2 (sw) in the Kitik-
meot Sea by ∼26 µatm, which they suggest may be due to
the inﬂuence of rivers. Following their approach, the sur-
face pCO2 (sw), SST, and salinity measurements from this
study are presented as a function of time since ice melt
(when sea ice concentration declines below 85 %; Fig. 7).
The RV Martin Bergmann observations are broadly consis-
tent with the general pCO2 model of Ahmed et al. (2019),
where low pCO2 (sw) values (∼300 µatm) are seen shortly
after sea melt and higher values (∼300–350 µatm) are seen
in the 2 months after sea ice melt. However, the 2016
pCO2 (sw) values are much higher and the 2018 values are
much lower than predicted by the model. The model is
also not a good predictor of the observed salinity values in
2016 and 2019. The CAA ﬂux estimate (Ahmed and Else,
2019) determined using the Ahmed et al. (2019) model re-
mains the best estimate for the region. However, the model
is clearly unable to capture the full interannual variability
in the RV Martin Bergmann observations. This could be
because as a CAA-wide model it is not tuned to the Ki-
tikmeot Sea where freshwater inputs are greater. Fitting a
quadratic equation to the RV Martin Bergmann pCO2 (sw)
observations produces the following equation: pCO2 (sw) =-
1.7452(X2) + 26.0281(X) + 272.7442 which can be used to
model pCO2 (sw), where X is weeks since ice breakup. Both
models predict very similar pCO2 (sw) in the ﬁrst 7 weeks af-
ter sea ice breakup; the average difference between the mod-
els for this period is 8.01 µatm. The models differ more af-
ter 7 weeks after sea ice breakup. At 14 weeks after sea
ice breakup, the model of Ahmed et al. (2019) predicts a
pCO2 (sw) that is 81.2 µatm higher than the model ﬁt to the
RV Martin Bergmann pCO2 (sw) observations. Fundamen-
tally, understanding the drivers of the large interannual vari-
ability in pCO2 (sw) seen in the Kitikmeot Sea requires an
understanding of the interconnected processes involved and
their timing. The interannual variability SST(1 m) and salinity
are comparable to the modelling results of Xu et al. (2021).
Expanding on that modelling work with a complex biogeo-
chemical model that can incorporate all the known processes
impacting pCO2 (sw) may make it possible to accurately re-
produce the pCO2 (sw) observations in this region.
4.4
The Kitikmeot Sea as a sink for atmospheric CO2
The RV Martin Bergmann pCO2 (sw) measurements indi-
cate that the region is a CO2 sink in early August in most
years (Table 1). At sea ice breakup, SST(1 m) values are low
and there are large 1pCO2 gradients between the surface
ocean and the atmosphere, and these conditions persist for
several weeks after sea ice breakup. Warming of the sur-
face ocean is the likely cause of pCO2 (sw) supersaturation
in some years, resulting in the region becoming a net source
later in the season. Decreasing SST(1 m) at the end of the
ice-free season lowers pCO2 (sw), producing a second period
when there are larger 1pCO2 gradients between the ocean
and the atmosphere; this is partially identiﬁable in the RV
Martin Bergmann measurements from late in 2017. The size
of the CO2 sink throughout the summer, appears not only
to be driven by time since ice breakup but also by the abso-
lute surface ocean pCO2 (sw) value at the time of ice breakup.
Ahmed and Else (2019) used remote sensing products to
identify this region as a net sink when the ﬂux is integrated
over the full ice-free period, and our measurements corrobo-
rate these ﬁndings.
The large variability in pCO2 (sw) measured in the 4 years
of observations highlights the fact that in the Arctic single
cruises in only part of the ice-free season are likely not cap-
turing the full seasonal variability. Many pCO2 (sw) observa-
tions in the Arctic are temporally biased towards the mid-
dle of the ice-free season when moving vessels through the
Arctic Ocean is easiest. As these single cruises are the only
measurements in many of these regions in databases like SO-
CAT (Bakker, 2016), they could result in biased regional ﬂux
estimates. In particular, it should be acknowledged that the
https://doi.org/10.5194/os-19-837-2023
Ocean Sci., 19, 837–856, 2023

852
R. P. Sims et al.: High interannual surface pCO2 variability in the southern Canadian
Figure 7. Surface (a) pCO2(sw), (b) SST and (c) salinity from the RV Martin Bergmann as a function of weeks of open water for the years
2016 to 2019. A quadratic ﬁt to the RV Martin Bergmann pCO2(sw) data is shown as a dashed black line. Black curves represent the model
output of Ahmed et al. (2019).
majority of the CAA is not included in the state-of-the-art
observation-based products (Landschützer et al., 2020).
5
Conclusions
The ONC mooring and EC tower both provide similar
pCO2 (sw) values in spring and autumn, showing good agree-
ment between the two platforms. Measured pCO2 (sw) from
the EC tower was sometimes similar to what was measured
from the RV Martin Bergmann, whereas at other times it was
much higher. Similar seasonal trends, which are likely re-
lated to temperature, were seen in pCO2 (sw) from the EC
tower and the RV Martin Bergmann. Comparing measure-
ments collected by the RV Martin Bergmann in and out of
Cambridge Bay indicates that Cambridge Bay surface ocean
pCO2 (sw) is similar to that in Dease Strait in August.
The Kitikmeot Sea was a CO2 sink or a very weak CO2
source over the summers of 2016–2019, consistent with pre-
vious measurements from Ahmed and Else (2019). The CO2
sink was highly variable from year to year at the beginning
of August (average observed ﬂuxes of +3.58, −2.96, −16.79
and −0.57 mmol m−2 d−1 during the 2016, 2017, 2018, and
2019 cruises, respectively) with average pCO2 (sw) as low as
288.55 µatm and as high as 445.08 µatm. The pCO2 (sw) val-
ues were much lower in 2018 due to the much lower SST(1 m)
that year. The magnitude of the air–water 1pCO2 through-
out the summer appears to be controlled by the absolute
pCO2 (sw) value at the time of ice breakup. Low pCO2 (sw)
values increase in August due to exchange with the atmo-
sphere and warming broadly following the predicted trends
using the model developed by Ahmed et al. (2019). In years
where pCO2 (sw) is high when ice breakup occurs, warm-
ing can cause a period of slight pCO2 (sw) supersaturation
in summer, in these situations the magnitude of this super-
saturation is likely moderated by the air–sea ﬂux reducing
pCO2 (sw). pCO2 (sw) was found to be ∼20–40 µatm lower in
the bays and inlets that were surveyed; this could be driven
by increased freshwater inputs into these isolated regions.
Lower pCO2 in the bays and inlets would represent an obser-
vational bias in the CAA-wide surveys (Ahmed et al., 2019).
Local freshwater ﬂuxes into the southern CAA are much
greater than elsewhere in the CAA, meaning that this bias
might be more prominent in the Kitikmeot Sea. Further ob-
servations in these regions may complement the basin-level
pCO2 mapping.
Ocean Sci., 19, 837–856, 2023
https://doi.org/10.5194/os-19-837-2023

R. P. Sims et al.: High interannual surface pCO2 variability in the southern Canadian
853
These ﬁndings provide a more nuanced picture of the con-
siderable interannual variability in pCO2 (sw) observed dur-
ing repeat cruises in the same region, underscoring how
much may be missed by relying on data collected during one-
off cruises along the dynamic Arctic coasts. In particular, the
pCO2 (sw) at the time of ice melt is very important as it dic-
tates the magnitude and direction of the ﬂux for much of the
ice-free period; however, a better understanding of pCO2 (sw)
through the ice-covered period is needed to help unravel the
seasonal and interannual variability.
Code and data availability. The processed underway data from the
RV Martin Bergmann, which are the new data described in this pa-
per, are available in the Supplement as MAT ﬁles. The raw and
processed underway data from the RV Martin Bergmann data are
available via Zenodo (Sims, 2023a). The ﬁnal processed data will
also be submitted to the Surface Ocean Carbon Atlas (SOCAT).
The wind data and inferred seawater pCO2 data from the EC
tower are included in the Supplement as MAT ﬁles. The AMSR2
sea ice data https://seaice.uni-bremen.de/sea-ice-concentration/
amsre-amsr2/ (Spreen et al., 2008), the NCEP winds https:
//psl.noaa.gov/data/gridded/data.ncep.reanalysis2.html (Kanamitsu
et al., 2002) and the atmospheric pCO2 data from Barrow that were
used in this paper are all freely available from their online reposi-
tories; literature citations are provided in the main text. Processing
code and the code needed to reproduce the ﬁgures was written in
MATLAB 2016a. The code is provided in the Supplement and is
also freely available at Zenodo (Sims, 2023b).
Supplement. The supplement related to this article is available on-
line at: https://doi.org/10.5194/os-19-837-2023-supplement.
Author contributions. This paper was written by RPS, and all co-
authors made contributions to the ﬁnal paper. BGTE installed the
underway system at the start of each ﬁeld season. The performance
of the underway system was monitored by BTGE with help from
SFJ, SFG, KAB, PJD and RPS. RPS organized and processed the
data. RPS made the ﬁgures and interpreted the results with support
from MA and BTGE. BJB analysed the data from the EC tower
and provided that data for this paper. PJD provided the data from
the ONC mooring. BGTE, KAB, CJM and WJW were central in
planning the cruise programme. BTGE oversaw completion of the
work.
Competing interests. The contact author has declared that none of
the authors has any competing interests.
Disclaimer. Publisher’s note: Copernicus Publications remains
neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
Acknowledgements. Parts of this research were completed on or ad-
jacent to Inuit Owned Lands under the authority of the Nunavut
Land Claim Agreement, and the work was licensed by the Nunavut
Research Institute. We thank the Ekaluktutiak Hunters and Trap-
pers Organization and the community of Cambridge Bay for their
hospitality and support of this project. We thank Polar Knowl-
edge Canada and the Canadian High Arctic Research Station for
their support and for providing accommodation and vehicles during
ﬁeld campaigns. We thank the captain and crew of the RV Martin
Bergmann for all their assistance. We also thank Shawn Marriott
and Francis Emingak for all their assistance in the ﬁeld and Sophia
Ahmed for her work on data interpretation. Data from Ocean Net-
works Canada was accessed under their Creative Commons CC-BY
4.0 License.
Financial support. This research has been supported by the Ma-
rine Environmental Observation Prediction and Response Network
(grant no. 1-02-02-004.1), the Kitikmeot Sea Science Study (K3S),
Fisheries and Oceans Canada, the Arctic Research Foundation, Nat-
ural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (grant
no. RGPIN-2015-04780), the Canada Foundation for Innovation
(John R. Edwards Leaders Fund (grant no. 34814)), the University
of Calgary Eyes High postdoctoral fellowship programme and Polar
Knowledge Canada (Northern Scientiﬁc Training Programme).
Review statement. This paper was edited by Mario Hoppema and
reviewed by Wiley Evans and one anonymous referee.
References
Ahmed, M. and Else, B. G.: The Ocean CO2 Sink in the Cana-
dian Arctic Archipelago: A Present-Day Budget and Past Trends
Due to Climate Change, Geophys. Res. Lett., 46, 9777–9785,
https://doi.org/10.1029/2019GL083547, 2019.
Ahmed, M., Else, B., Burgers, T., and Papakyriakou, T.: Variabil-
ity of surface water pCO2 in the Canadian Arctic Archipelago
from 2010 to 2016, J. Geophys. Res.-Ocean., 124, 1876–1896,
https://doi.org/10.1029/2018JC014639, 2019.
Ahmed, M. M., Else, B. G., Capelle, D., Miller, L. A., and Papakyr-
iakou, T.: Underestimation of surface pCO2 and air-sea CO2
ﬂuxes due to freshwater stratiﬁcation in an Arctic shelf sea, Hud-
son Bay, Elementa, 8, 084, https://doi.org/10.1525/elementa.084,
2020.
Ahmed, M. M., Else, B. G., Butterworth, B., Capelle, D.
W., Guéguen, C., Miller, L. A., Meilleur, C., and Pa-
pakyriakou,
T.:
Widespread
surface
water
pCO2
under-
saturation during ice-melt season in an Arctic continen-
tal shelf sea (Hudson Bay, Canada), Elementa, 9, 00130,
https://doi.org/10.1525/elementa.2020.00130, 2021.
Arrigo, K. R., Perovich, D. K., Pickart, R. S., Brown, Z.
W.,
Van
Dijken,
G.
L.,
Lowry,
K.
E.,
Mills,
M.
M.,
Palmer, M. A., Balch, W. M., and Bahr, F.: Massive phy-
toplankton blooms under Arctic sea ice, Science, 336, 1408,
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1215065, 2012.
Back, D.-Y., Ha, S.-Y., Else, B., Hanson, M., Jones, S. F., Shin,
K.-H., Tatarek, A., Wiktor, J. M., Cicek, N., and Alam, S.:
https://doi.org/10.5194/os-19-837-2023
Ocean Sci., 19, 837–856, 2023

854
R. P. Sims et al.: High interannual surface pCO2 variability in the southern Canadian
On the impact of wastewater efﬂuent on phytoplankton in
the Arctic coastal zone: a case study in the Kitikmeot Sea
of the Canadian Arctic, Sci. Total Environ., 764, 143861,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.143861, 2021.
Bakker, D. C. E., Pfeil, B., Landa, C. S., Metzl, N., O’Brien, K.
M., Olsen, A., Smith, K., Cosca, C., Harasawa, S., Jones, S. D.,
Nakaoka, S., Nojiri, Y., Schuster, U., Steinhoff, T., Sweeney, C.,
Takahashi, T., Tilbrook, B., Wada, C., Wanninkhof, R., Alin, S.
R., Balestrini, C. F., Barbero, L., Bates, N. R., Bianchi, A. A.,
Bonou, F., Boutin, J., Bozec, Y., Burger, E. F., Cai, W.-J., Castle,
R. D., Chen, L., Chierici, M., Currie, K., Evans, W., Feather-
stone, C., Feely, R. A., Fransson, A., Goyet, C., Greenwood, N.,
Gregor, L., Hankin, S., Hardman-Mountford, N. J., Harlay, J.,
Hauck, J., Hoppema, M., Humphreys, M. P., Hunt, C. W., Huss,
B., Ibánhez, J. S. P., Johannessen, T., Keeling, R., Kitidis, V.,
Körtzinger, A., Kozyr, A., Krasakopoulou, E., Kuwata, A., Land-
schützer, P., Lauvset, S. K., Lefèvre, N., Lo Monaco, C., Manke,
A., Mathis, J. T., Merlivat, L., Millero, F. J., Monteiro, P. M. S.,
Munro, D. R., Murata, A., Newberger, T., Omar, A. M., Ono, T.,
Paterson, K., Pearce, D., Pierrot, D., Robbins, L. L., Saito, S.,
Salisbury, J., Schlitzer, R., Schneider, B., Schweitzer, R., Sieger,
R., Skjelvan, I., Sullivan, K. F., Sutherland, S. C., Sutton, A. J.,
Tadokoro, K., Telszewski, M., Tuma, M., van Heuven, S. M. A.
C., Vandemark, D., Ward, B., Watson, A. J., and Xu, S.: A multi-
decade record of high-quality f CO2 data in version 3 of the Sur-
face Ocean CO2 Atlas (SOCAT), Earth Syst. Sci. Data, 8, 383–
413, https://doi.org/10.5194/essd-8-383-2016, 2016.
Bates, N. and Mathis, J.: The Arctic Ocean marine carbon cycle:
evaluation of air-sea CO2 exchanges, ocean acidiﬁcation im-
pacts and potential feedbacks, Biogeosciences, 6, 2433–2459,
https://doi.org/10.5194/bg-6-2433-2009, 2009.
Brown, K. A., Williams, W. J., Carmack, E. C., Fiske, G., François,
R., McLennan, D., and Peucker-Ehrenbrink, B.: Geochemistry of
small Canadian Arctic Rivers with diverse geological and hydro-
logical settings, J. Geophys. Res.-Biogeo., 125, e2019JG005414,
https://doi.org/10.1029/2019JG005414, 2020.
Butterworth, B. J. and Else, B. G. T.: Dried, closed-path
eddy
covariance
method
for
measuring
carbon
dioxide
ﬂux over sea ice, Atmos. Meas. Tech., 11, 6075–6090,
https://doi.org/10.5194/amt-11-6075-2018, 2018.
Cai, W.-J., Chen, L., Chen, B., Gao, Z., Lee, S. H., Chen, J., Pier-
rot, D., Sullivan, K., Wang, Y., and Hu, X.: Decrease in the CO2
uptake capacity in an ice-free Arctic Ocean basin, Science, 329,
556–559, https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1189338, 2010.
Chierici, M., Fransson, A., Lansard, B., Miller, L. A., Mucci, A.,
Shadwick, E., Thomas, H., Tremblay, J., and Papakyriakou, T.
N.: Impact of biogeochemical processes and environmental fac-
tors on the calcium carbonate saturation state in the Circumpolar
Flaw Lead in the Amundsen Gulf, Arctic Ocean, J. Geophys. Re.-
Ocean., 116, C00G09, https://doi.org/10.1029/2011JC007184,
2011.
Cruz-García, R., Ortega, P., Guemas, V., Acosta Navarro, J.
C., Massonnet, F., and Doblas-Reyes, F. J.: An anatomy
of Arctic sea ice forecast biases in the seasonal predic-
tion system with EC-Earth, Clim. Dynam., 56, 1799–1813,
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00382-020-05560-4, 2021.
Dalman, L. A., Else, B. G., Barber, D., Carmack, E., Williams, W.
J., Campbell, K., Duke, P. J., Kirillov, S., Mundy, C. J., and Trem-
blay, J.-É.: Enhanced bottom-ice algal biomass across a tidal
strait in the Kitikmeot Sea of the Canadian Arctic, Elementa, 7,
22, https://doi.org/10.1525/elementa.361, 2019.
DeGrandpre, M., Evans, W., Timmermans, M. L., Krishﬁeld,
R., Williams, B., and Steele, M.: Changes in the Arctic Ocean
carbon cycle with diminishing ice cover, Geophys. Res. Lett., 47,
e2020GL088051,
https://doi.org/10.1002/essoar.10502603.1,
2020.
Dickson, A. G. and Millero, F. J.: A comparison of the
equilibrium constants for the dissociation of carbonic acid
in seawater media, Deep-Sea Res. Pt. A, 34, 1733–1743,
https://doi.org/10.1016/0198-0149(87)90021-5, 1987.
Dickson, A. G.: Thermodynamics of the dissociation of boric acid
in synthetic seawater from 273.15 to 318.15 K, Deep-Sea Res. Pt.
A, 37, 755–766, https://doi.org/10.1016/0198-0149(90)90004-F,
1990.
Dickson, A. G., Sabine, C. L., and Christian, J. R.: Guide to
best practices for ocean CO2 measurements, North Paciﬁc
Marine Science Organization, Sidney, British Columbia, 191,
https://doi.org/10.25607/OBP-1342, 2007.
Dong, Y., Yang, M., Bakker, D. C. E., Kitidis, V., and Bell, T. G.:
Uncertainties in eddy covariance air–sea CO2 ﬂux measurements
and implications for gas transfer velocity parameterisations, At-
mos. Chem. Phys., 21, 8089–8110, https://doi.org/10.5194/acp-
21-8089-2021, 2021a.
Dong, Y., Yang, M., Bakker, D. C. E., Liss, P. S., Kitidis, V.,
Brown, I., Chierici, M., Fransson, A., and Bell, T. G.: Near-
Surface Stratiﬁcation Due to Ice Melt Biases Arctic Air-Sea
CO2 Flux Estimates, Geophys. Res. Lett., 48, e2021GL095266,
https://doi.org/10.1029/2021GL095266, 2021b.
Duke, P., Else, B., Jones, S., Marriot, S., Ahmed, M., Nan-
dan, V., Butterworth, B., Gonski, S., Dewey, R., and Sas-
tri, A.: Seasonal marine carbon system processes in an Arc-
tic coastal landfast sea ice environment observed with an
innovative underwater sensor platform, Elementa, 9, 00103,
https://doi.org/10.1525/elementa.2021.00103, 2021.
Else, B., Galley, R., Papakyriakou, T., Miller, L., Mucci, A., and
Barber, D.: Sea surface pCO2 cycles and CO2 ﬂuxes at land-
fast sea ice edges in Amundsen Gulf, Canada, J. Geophys. Res.-
Ocean., 117, C09010, https://doi.org/10.1029/2012JC007901,
2012.
Else, B. G., Whitehead, J. J., Galindo, V., Ferland, J., Mundy, C.,
Gonski, S. F., Ehn, J. K., Rysgaard, S., and Babin, M.: Response
of the Arctic marine inorganic carbon system to ice algae and
under-ice phytoplankton blooms: A case study along the fast-ice
edge of Bafﬁn Bay, J. Geophys. Res.-Ocean., 124, 1277–1293,
https://doi.org/10.1029/2018JC013899, 2019.
Else, B. G., Cranch, A., Sims, R. P., Jones, S., Dalman, L. A.,
Mundy, C. J., Segal, R. A., Scharien, R. K., and Guha, T.: Vari-
ability in sea ice carbonate chemistry: a case study comparing the
importance of ikaite precipitation, bottom-ice algae, and currents
across an invisible polynya, The Cryosphere, 16, 3685–3701,
https://doi.org/10.5194/tc-16-3685-2022, 2022.
Evans, W., Pocock, K., Hare, A., Weekes, C., Hales, B., Jackson,
J., Gurney-Smith, H., Mathis, J. T., Alin, S. R., and Feely, R. A.:
Marine CO2 patterns in the northern salish sea, Front. Mar. Sci.,
5, 536, https://doi.org/10.3389/fmars.2018.00536, 2019.
Ford, J. D., Smit, B., Wandel, J., Allurut, M., Shappa, K., It-
tusarjuat, H., and Qrunnut, K.: Climate change in the Arctic:
current and future vulnerability in two Inuit communities in
Ocean Sci., 19, 837–856, 2023
https://doi.org/10.5194/os-19-837-2023

R. P. Sims et al.: High interannual surface pCO2 variability in the southern Canadian
855
Canada, Geogr. J., 174, 45–62, https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1475-
4959.2007.00249.x, 2008.
Geilfus, N.-X., Galley, R., Crabeck, O., Papakyriakou, T., Landy,
J., Tison, J.-L., and Rysgaard, S.: Inorganic carbon dynamics
of melt-pond-covered ﬁrst-year sea ice in the Canadian Arctic,
Biogeosciences, 12, 2047–2061, https://doi.org/10.5194/bg-12-
2047-2015, 2015.
Geilfus, N.-X., Pind, M., Else, B., Galley, R., Miller, L., Thomas,
H., Gosselin, M., Rysgaard, S., Wang, F., and Papakyri-
akou, T.: Spatial and temporal variability of seawater pCO2
within the Canadian Arctic Archipelago and Bafﬁn Bay dur-
ing the summer and autumn 2011, Cont. Shelf Res., 156, 1–10,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.csr.2018.01.006, 2018.
Harris, L. N., Yurkowski, D. J., Gilbert, M. J., Else, B. G., Duke,
P. J., Ahmed, M. M., Tallman, R. F., Fisk, A. T., and Moore,
J.: Depth and temperature preference of anadromous Arctic char
Salvelinus alpinus in the Kitikmeot Sea, a shallow and low-
salinity area of the Canadian Arctic, Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser., 634,
175–197, https://doi.org/10.3354/meps13195, 2020.
Ho, D. T. and Schanze, J. J.: Precipitation-Induced Reduction in
Surface Ocean pCO2: Observations From the Eastern Tropi-
cal Paciﬁc Ocean, Geophys. Res. Lett., 47, e2020GL088252,
https://doi.org/10.1029/2020GL088252, 2020.
Jakobsson, M.: Hypsometry and volume of the Arctic Ocean
and its constituent seas, Geochem. Geophy. Geosy., 3, 1–18,
https://doi.org/10.1029/2001GC000302, 2002.
JCGM: Evaluation of measurement data – Guide to the expression
of uncertainty in measurement, 134, 2008.
Kalnay, E., Kanamitsu, M., Kistler, R., Collins, W., Deaven, D.,
Gandin, L., Iredell, M., Saha, S., White, G., and Woollen,
J.: The NCEP/NCAR 40-year reanalysis project, Bull. Am.
Meteorol. Soc., 77, 437–472, https://doi.org/10.1175/1520-
0477(1996)077<0437:TNYRP>2.0.CO;2, 1996.
Kanamitsu, M., Ebisuzaki, W., Woollen, J., Yang, S.-K., Hnilo,
J. J., Fiorino, M., and Potter, G. L.: NCEP-DOE AMIP-
II Reanalysis (R-2), Bull. Am. Meteorol. Soc., 1631–1643,
https://doi.org/10.1175/BAMS-83-11-1631, 2002 (data avail-
able at https://psl.noaa.gov/data/gridded/data.ncep.reanalysis2.
html, last access: 25 January 2021).
Kim, K., Ha, S.-Y., Kim, B. K., Mundy, C., Gough, K. M., Pogorz-
elec, N. M., and Lee, S. H.: Carbon and nitrogen uptake rates
and macromolecular compositions of bottom-ice algae and phy-
toplankton at Cambridge Bay in Dease Strait, Canada, Ann.
Glaciol.,
61,
106–116,
https://doi.org/10.1017/aog.2020.17,
2020.
Kljun, N., Calanca, P., Rotach, M. W., and Schmid, H. P.:
A simple two-dimensional parameterisation for Flux Foot-
print Prediction (FFP), Geosci. Model Dev., 8, 3695–3713,
https://doi.org/10.5194/gmd-8-3695-2015, 2015.
Lan, X., Dlugokencky, E. J., Mund, J. W., Crotwell, A. M.,
Crotwell, M. J., Moglia, E., Madronich, M., Neff, D., and
Thoning, K. W.: Atmospheric Carbon Dioxide Dry Air Mole
Fractions from the NOAA GML Carbon Cycle Cooperative
Global Air Sampling Network (Version: 2022-07-28) [data set],
https://doi.org/10.15138/wkgj-f215, 2022.
Landrum, L. and Holland, M. M.: Extremes become routine in
an emerging new Arctic, Nat. Clim. Change, 10, 1108–1115,
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41558-020-0892-z, 2020.
Landschützer, P., Laruelle, G. G., Roobaert, A., and Reg-
nier, P.: A uniform pCO2
climatology combining open
and coastal oceans, Earth Syst. Sci. Data, 12, 2537–2553,
https://doi.org/10.5194/essd-12-2537-2020, 2020.
Lewis, E., Wallace, D., and Allison, L. J.: Program developed for
CO2 system calculations, Carbon Dioxide Information Anal-
ysis Center, managed by Lockheed Martin Energy Research
Corporation for the US Department of Energy Tennessee,
https://doi.org/10.2172/639712, 1998.
Loose, B., Schlosser, P., Perovich, D., Ringelberg, D., Ho, D., Taka-
hashi, T., Richter-Menge, J., Reynolds, C., McGillis, W., and Ti-
son, J.-L.: Gas diffusion through columnar laboratory sea ice:
implications for mixed-layer ventilation of CO2 in the seasonal
ice zone, Tellus B, 63, 23–39, https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-
0889.2010.00506.x, 2011.
Macdonald, R., Anderson, L., Christensen, J., Miller, L., Semile-
tov, I., and Stein, R.: The Arctic Ocean: budgets and ﬂuxes,
in: Carbon and Nutrient Fluxes in Continental Margins: A
Global Synthesis, edited by: Liu, K., Atkinson, , L., Q.,
and R., T.-M., Springer-Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg, 291–303,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-92735-8, 2010.
Manning, C. C., Preston, V. L., Jones, S. F., Michel, A. P., Nichol-
son, D. P., Duke, P. J., Ahmed, M. M., Manganini, K., Else, B.
G., and Tortell, P. D.: River inﬂow dominates methane emis-
sions in an Arctic coastal system, Geophys. Res. Lett., 47,
e2020GL087669, https://doi.org/10.1029/2020GL087669, 2020.
Martin,
J.,
Dumont,
D.,
and
Tremblay,
J.
É.:
Contribu-
tion
of
subsurface
chlorophyll
maxima
to
primary
pro-
duction in the coastal Beaufort Sea (Canadian Arctic): A
model assessment, J. Geophys. Res.-Ocean., 118, 5873–5886,
https://doi.org/10.1002/2013JC008843, 2013.
Mehrbach,
C.,
Culberson,
C.
H.,
Hawley,
J.
E.,
and
Pytkowicx,
R.
M.:
Measurement
of
the
apparent
dis-
sociation
constants
of
carbonic
acid
in
seawater
at
at-
mospheric
pressure,
Limnol.
Oceanogr.,
18,
897–907,
https://doi.org/10.4319/lo.1973.18.6.0897, 1973.
Meire, L., Søgaard, D., Mortensen, J., Meysman, F., Soetaert,
K., Arendt, K., Juul-Pedersen, T., Blicher, M., and Rys-
gaard, S.: Glacial meltwater and primary production are drivers
of strong CO2 uptake in fjord and coastal waters adjacent
to the Greenland Ice Sheet, Biogeosciences, 12, 2347–2363,
https://doi.org/10.5194/bg-12-2347-2015, 2015.
Miller, L. A., Burgers, T. M., Burt, W. J., Granskog, M. A., and
Papakyriakou, T. N.: Air-Sea CO2 Flux Estimates in Stratiﬁed
Arctic Coastal Waters: How Wrong Can We Be?, Geophys.
Res. Lett., 46, 235–243, https://doi.org/10.1029/2018GL080099,
2018.
Mundy, C., Gosselin, M., Ehn, J., Gratton, Y., Rossnagel, A.,
Barber, D. G., Martin, J., Tremblay, J. É., Palmer, M., and
Arrigo, K. R.: Contribution of under-ice primary produc-
tion to an ice-edge upwelling phytoplankton bloom in the
Canadian Beaufort Sea, Geophys. Res. Lett., 36, L17601,
https://doi.org/10.1029/2009GL038837, 2009.
NGDC, N. G. D. C.: 2-minute gridded global relief data (ETOPO2)
v2, National Geophysical Data Center, NOAA [data set],
https://doi.org/10.7289/V5J1012Q, 2006.
Nightingale, P. D., Malin, G., Law, C. S., Watson, A. J., Liss, P. S.,
Liddicoat, M. I., Boutin, J., and Upstill-Goddard, R. C.: In situ
evaluation of air-sea gas exchange parameterizations using novel
https://doi.org/10.5194/os-19-837-2023
Ocean Sci., 19, 837–856, 2023

856
R. P. Sims et al.: High interannual surface pCO2 variability in the southern Canadian
conservative and volatile tracers, Global Biogeochem. Cy., 14,
373–387, https://doi.org/10.1029/1999GB900091, 2000.
Parmentier, F.-J. W., Christensen, T. R., Sørensen, L. L., Rys-
gaard, S., McGuire, A. D., Miller, P. A., and Walker,
D.
A.:
The
impact
of
lower
sea-ice
extent
on
Arctic
greenhouse-gas exchange, Nat. Clim. Change, 3, 195–202,
https://doi.org/10.1038/nclimate1784, 2013.
Pawlowicz, R.: M_Map: A mapping package for MATLAB (1.4)
[code], 2020.
Perrette, M., Yool, A., Quartly, G., and Popova, E. E.: Near-ubiquity
of ice-edge blooms in the Arctic, Biogeosciences, 8, 515–524,
https://doi.org/10.5194/bg-8-515-2011, 2011.
Peterson, J. T., Komhyr, W., Waterman, L., Gammon, R., Thon-
ing, K., and Conway, T.: Atmospheric CO2 variations at Barrow,
Alaska, 1973–1982, in: Scientiﬁc Application of Baseline Ob-
servations of Atmospheric Composition (SABOAC), edited by:
Ehhalt, D., Pearman, G., and Galbally, I., Springer, Dordrecht,
397–416, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-94-009-3909-7_20, 1987.
Sharp, Jonathan D., Pierrot, Denis, Humphreys, Matthew P., Epi-
talon, Jean-Marie, Orr, James C., Lewis, Ernie R., and Wal-
lace, Douglas W. R.: CO2SYSv3 for MATLAB (v3.0.1), Zenodo
[software], https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3952803, 2020.
Sims, R. P., Schuster, U., Watson, A. J., Yang, M. X., Hopkins, F. E.,
Stephens, J., and Bell, T. G.: A measurement system for vertical
seawater proﬁles close to the air–sea interface, Ocean Sci., 13,
649–660, https://doi.org/10.5194/os-13-649-2017, 2017.
Sims, R. P.: Martin Bergmann pCO2 dataset 2016–2019 (1.0.0),
Zenodo
[data
set],
https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.7979465,
2023a.
Sims,
R.
P.:
Richard-Sims/Sims_2023_Bergmann_pCO2:
v1.0.0-Publication
(v1.0.0-Publication),
Zenodo
[code],
https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.7979433, 2023b.
Spreen, G., Kaleschke, L., and Heygster, G.: Sea ice remote sens-
ing using AMSR-E 89-GHz channels, J. Geophys. Res.-Ocean.,
113, https://doi.org/10.1029/2005JC003384, 2008 (data set is
available at https://seaice.uni-bremen.de/sea-ice-concentration/
amsre-amsr2/, last access: 20 June 2020).
Takahashi, T., Olafsson, J., Goddard, J. G., Chipman, D. W., and
Sutherland, S.: Seasonal variation of CO2 and nutrients in the
high-latitude surface oceans: A comparative study, Global Bio-
geochem. Cy., 7, 843–878, https://doi.org/10.1029/93GB02263,
1993.
Teodoru, C. R., Del Giorgio, P. A., Prairie, Y. T., and Camire,
M.: Patterns in pCO2 in boreal streams and rivers of north-
ern Quebec, Canada, Global Biogeochem. Cy., 23, GB2012,
https://doi.org/10.1029/2008GB003404, 2009.
Thoning, K. W., Crotwell, A. M., and Mund, a. J. W.: Atmo-
spheric Carbon Dioxide Dry Air Mole Fractions from contin-
uous measurements at Mauna Loa, Hawaii, Barrow, Alaska,
American Samoa and South Pole, (Version 2020-08) [data set],
https://doi.org/10.15138/yaf1-bk21, 2020.
Van Heuven, S., Pierrot, D., Rae, J., Lewis, E., and Wallace,
D.: MATLAB Program Developed for CO2 System Calcula-
tions, ORNL/CDIAC-105b, Carbon Dioxide Information Anal-
ysis Center, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, US Department of
Energy, Oak Ridge, Tennessee [code], https://cdiac.ess-dive.lbl.
gov/ftp/co2sys/CO2SYS_calc_MATLAB_v1.1/ (last access: 28
July 2016), 2011.
Wang,
Q.,
Myers,
P.
G.,
Hu,
X.,
and
Bush,
A.
B.:
Flow
constraints
on
pathways
through
the
Cana-
dian
Arctic
Archipelago,
Atmos.-Ocean.,
50,
373–385,
https://doi.org/10.1080/07055900.2012.704348, 2012.
Wanninkhof, R.: Relationship between wind speed and gas ex-
change over the ocean revisited, Limnol. Oceanogr.-Method., 12,
351–362, https://doi.org/10.4319/lom.2014.12.351, 2014.
Weiss, R. F.: Carbon dioxide in water and seawater: the
solubility of a non-ideal gas, Mar. Chem., 2, 203–215,
https://doi.org/10.1016/0304-4203(74)90015-2, 1974.
Wessel, P. and Smith, W. H.: A global, self-consistent, hierarchical,
high-resolution shoreline database, J. Geophys. Res.-Sol. Ea.,
101, 8741–8743, https://doi.org/10.1029/96JB00104, 1996.
Williams, W., Brown, K. A., Bluhm, B., Carmack, E. C., Dal-
man, L., Danielson, S. L., Else, B. G., Friedriksen, R., Mundy,
C., and Rotermund, L. M.: Stratiﬁcation in the Canadian Arctic
Archipelago’s Kitikmeot Sea: biological and geochemical con-
sequences, Polar Knowledge Canada, Ottawa, Canada, 46–52,
https://doi.org/10.35298/pkc.2018.06, 2018.
Woolf, D. K., Shutler, J. D., Goddijn-Murphy, L., Watson, A.,
Chapron, B., Nightingale, P. D., Donlon, C. J., Piskozub, J.,
Yelland, M., and Ashton, I.: Key uncertainties in the recent
air-sea ﬂux of CO2, Global Biogeochem. Cy., 33, 1548–1563,
https://doi.org/10.1029/2018GB006041, 2019.
Wynja, V., Demers, A.-M., Laforest, S., Lacelle, M., Pasher, J.,
Duffe, J., Chaudhary, B., Wang, H., and Giles, T.: Mapping
coastal information across Canada’s northern regions based on
low-altitude helicopter videography in support of environmen-
tal emergency preparedness efforts, J. Coast. Res., 31, 276–290,
https://doi.org/10.2112/JCOASTRES-D-14-00059.1, 2015.
Xu, C., Mikhael, W., Myers, P. G., Else, B., Sims, R. P.,
and Zhou, Q.: Effects of Seasonal Ice Coverage on the
Physical Oceanographic Conditions of the Kitikmeot Sea in
the Canadian Arctic Archipelago, Atmos.-Ocean., 59, 1–19,
https://doi.org/10.1080/07055900.2021.1965531, 2021.
Ocean Sci., 19, 837–856, 2023
https://doi.org/10.5194/os-19-837-2023