# Source: Blondel, P., & Davidge, J. (2023). Shipping and ice-covered waters – how accurate are the MSFD “shipping bands”? In M. Taroudakis (Ed.), Proceedings of the 7th Underwater Acoustics Conference and Exhibition, UACE 2023 (pp. 587-594). (Underwater Acoustic Conference and Exhibition Series). I.A.C.M, Foundation for Research and Technology - Hellas. https://www.uaconferences.org/media/breezingforms/uploads/2023papers/1943_Blondel_2023_05_26_11_52_04.pdf
# ID: ShippingAndIceCoveredWaters

Shipping and Ice-Covered Waters – How Accurate Are The MSFD 
“Shipping Bands”? 
Philippe Blondel a, Joey Davidge a 
a Department of Physics, University of Bath; Claverton Down, Bath BA2 7AY, UK 
Contact author: Philippe Blondel, pyspb@bath.ac.uk  
Abstract: The EU Marine Strategy Framework Directive (MSFD) is an important tool in 
sustainable use of the oceans, addressing the UN Sustainable Development Goal SDG-14 
“Life below water” and contributing to the Blue Economy. The definition of “shipping 
bands” at third-octave bands centred on 63 Hz and 125 Hz has been particularly useful to 
assess the impacts of marine traffic in different regions around Europe and in other 
oceans. Shipping is bound to increase in Arctic regions, as the next years will see 
amplified effects of climate change and easier access to ice-covered waters, sometimes 
with the total disappearance of ice in summer. We present here a test case in the shallow 
waters of Cambridge Bay (Nunavut, Canada), using measurements made available by 
Ocean Networks Canada and the Canadian Ice Service. We compare the months of August 
(little to no ice, and shipping activity) with the months of May (generally full ice cover and 
dynamic ice processes, but no shipping), between 2015 and 2020. Sound Pressure Levels 
and other metrics were derived with PAMGuide (Merchant et al., 2015, 2022), focusing 
on the “shipping bands”. Individual ship signatures and general human impacts can be 
clearly identified and overall trends are compared with AIS data. As ice cover increases 
and shipping stops, the ”shipping bands” are dominated by a variety of ice processes, and 
the comparisons between years shows interesting implications for the use of the MSFD in 
ice-covered waters. Monitoring of these bands also has direct implications for local 
communities and the fragile ecosystems present in Arctic waters. 
Keywords: shipping, Marine Strategy Framework Directive, polar acoustics, ice acoustics

1. RATIONALE 
Shipping is an integral part of global trade and the Blue Economy is expected to double 
in size to $3tn by 2030 (https://www.oecd.org/ocean/topics/ocean-economy/). It is 
however associated to rising average sound levels [1-3]. This has led to concerns that the 
chronic presence of non-impulsive low-frequency anthropogenic noise may also affect 
marine species [4, 5] and there is a clear need for understanding these impacts in different 
environments and for setting clear guidance on acceptable sound levels. 
The EU “Marine Strategy Framework Directive 2008/56/EC” (MSFD) is an important 
tool in the sustainable use of the oceans, providing a comprehensive series of metrics and 
contributing to addressing the UN Sustainable Development Goal SDG-14 “Life below 
water” (https://www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/oceans/). Recently (December 2022), 
it was augmented by additional guidelines about setting threshold values for continuous 
underwater sounds [6], accounting for local conditions, acoustic baselines and marine life. 
The definition of “shipping bands” at third-octave bands centred on 63 Hz and 125 Hz has 
been particularly useful to assess the impacts of marine traffic in different regions around 
Europe and in other oceans (e.g. [7, 8] inter alia). 
But how do these definitions fare in very different soundscapes? This is particularly 
important in the Arctic, as it is undergoing rapid climate change and increasing 
anthropogenic activities. Arctic amplification means polar regions are warming three 
times faster than the global average [9] and the Arctic seas are warming significantly 
down to depths of 700 m [10]. Between 1979 and 2019, the Arctic sea ice declined up to 
43% in all regions, with sea ice becoming younger and thinner over this period [11, 12]. 
The gradual opening of the Northern Sea Route and the Northwest Passage is now 
associated with the distinct possibility of trans-Arctic routes in the near future [13], adding 
to existing shipping (Fig. 1) and therefore to its underwater impacts, especially if larger 
ships are also used. 
 
 
 
Fig.1: Left: shipping in the Canadian Arctic is well documented and following several 
routes (map from Transport Canada, https://tc.canada.ca/en/marine-
transportation/arctic-shipping/canadian-arctic-shipping-routes, 2010). Cambridge Bay is 
indicated with a yellow star. Right: Arctic shipping is expected to increase as the ice cover 
decreases, especially along the coastlines and directly through the Arctic Ocean

(projections for a moderate climate change scenario, with Representative Concentration 
Pathway RCP = 4.5, by [13]). 
 
The work presented here uses long-term acoustic measurements in Cambridge Bay 
(Nunavut, Canada), gathered by Ocean Networks Canada (ONC) as part of their 
Community Observatory programmes. The data are analysed for the months of May and 
August in 2015, 2016, 2018, 2019 and 2020. Their interpretations are informed by 
measurements of ice cover and concentration, at local and regional levels, coming from 
ONC direct measurements and daily syntheses of ice cover by the Canadian Ice Service. 
They will focus on the following questions: 
• Can shipping signatures be identified in the “shipping bands” in this particular 
environment (shallow and Arctic)? 
• Can daily summaries be used to automatically identify shipping activity? 
• When there is maximal ice cover (and therefore no shipping), how do “shipping 
bands” perform? 
• Is there already a noticeable trend from year to year in the amount of shipping and 
its underwater acoustic impact? 
2. METHODOLOGY 
Ambient sounds were measured at the seafloor observatory operated by Ocean 
Networks Canada, 8 m deep in Cambridge Bay. The hydrophone sensitivity is -170 dB re. 
1 Pa. Audio data were in lossless WAV format for all years where data was recorded, 
and in lossless FLAC format for 2020 (converted to WAV), with a lower frequency limit 
of 10 Hz and upper frequency limit of 32 kHz (Nyquist frequency). The acoustic data is 
divided into time segments of 1 second, filtered with a Hann window with 50% overlap 
and processed with PAMGuide [14] and different metrics (like third-octave PSD and SPL) 
then aggregated every 5 minutes. Spectrograms and Empirical Probability Densities show 
the acoustic complexity and variations of these environments with seasons (Fig. 2). The 
months of August and May were selected as, for each year, they corresponded to the 
minimal and maximal levels of ice, respectively. 
 
 
Fig.2: Seasonal variations are mostly related to the level of ice cover and to shipping. 
From [15].

Ice cover is measured locally, with an ice profiler attached to the hydrophone frame, 
showing the presence of any ice above the hydrophone and its thickness, and made 
available by ONC. This was the primary means of deciding which months were selected 
for endmembers of ice cover. Ice satellite charts are available from the Canadian Ice 
Service [16], daily for the August months and weekly for the Math months, showing 
amounts of ice cover and types of ice (using the WMO Egg Code to provide a numerical 
value of ice thickness). Ice thickness during winter months is also available from the 
Canadian Ice Service, measured directly from ice auger drillings. Typical data is presented 
in Fig. 3. Other ONC measurements include temperature and salinity (not directly used in 
the present study).  
 
 
Fig.3: Ice measurements were obtained at regional and local scales. Left: Regional ice 
chart for 11th May 2020 [16]. Cambridge Bay (lower right of the chart) has thick first-
year ice, noted as dark green. Right: ice thickness was measured by Ocean Networks 
Canada directly above the observing station with ice auger drilling (IAD) and upward-
looking acoustic ice profiler (in May 2020) and with satellite measurements and ice 
profiler (in August 2020). 
 
3. RESULTS 
Sound Pressure Levels were systematically computed for the third-octave bands centred 
on 63 Hz and 125 Hz, often called the “shipping bands”. Boxplots are used to show the 
averages for each day, the lower and upper quartiles, and outliers are plotted as individual 
crosses (Fig. 4). The May months are all flat and uniform, whereas August data often 
shows larger data spreads. In May 2018 (Fig. 4, bottom), some days show larger spreads 
associated with smaller numbers of measurements (possibly due to equipment issues). 
Analyses of full spectrograms confirm there is no shipping during these months, agreeing 
with the presence of thick ice all over. The lower outliers (< 53 dB, Sea State 0 according 
to the Wenz curves) are interpreted as a reduction of the natural ambient noise by the ice 
cover. August months usually sport larger spreads of SPLs, associated with shipping and 
other human activities during part of the day (as evidenced by spectrograms) and often 
higher average levels if this activity lasts for a significant portion of a day. It is therefore 
relatively straightforward to identify days with shipping. The high numbers of outliers 
during the months of May however warrant further investigation.

Fig.4: Example Third-Octave Levels for 2018, contrasting August (top: occasional 
shipping and minimal to no ice) with May (bottom: no shipping and maximal ice). 
 
Scatter plots of SPLs in one “shipping band” respective to the other are useful to show 
these variations. These plots (Fig. 5-6) show SPLs colour-coded by years. A straight line 
has been added to better see whether SPLs are lower in one third-octave band or the other; 
points below the line show SPLs are higher at 63 Hz, whereas points above the line show 
higher SPLs in the 125-Hz band. Grey shading indicates SPLs louder than expected for 
natural sounds, based on the Wenz curves, and expected SPLs for the different sea states 
are indicated as individual points in the lower left of each scatter plot. 
 
 
Fig.4: Evolution of sound levels in the “shipping bands” during successive summers 
(little to no ice cover).

During the months of August (Fig. 4), the SPLs show a great variation along each side 
of the straight line: shipping levels are sometimes louder in the 63-Hz band and sometimes 
louder in the 125-Hz band, in line with other observations of shipping noise in shallow 
waters (e.g. [7, 8]). Individual clouds are clearly visible (e.g. higher levels in 2015) and 
interpreted as individual ships based on the spectrograms: these ships can often be heard 
coming and returning, with associated variations in SPLs as they get closer to the 
measuring hydrophone. The numbers of ships each year was not large enough or variable 
enough [17] to meaningfully assess associated variations in acoustic impacts, with 9-38 
ships recorded each year, including during Covid restrictions. 
Conversely, during the months of May (Fig. 5), SPLs are grouped along the straight 
line, showing they are nearly equal in both frequency bands and with much smaller spread. 
They are often louder than expected in specific Sea States. When there is no shipping, 
because of the ubiquitous ice cover, these “shipping bands” are still loud enough and 
variable enough that they need interpreting with caution, looking at other third-octave 
bands. Here, other human activities (e.g. snowmobiles on the surface of ice) can be 
discounted because of the differences in time-frequency signatures (e.g. [18]). Our 
analyses instead show these louder sound levels are associated with other loud levels in 
the frequency bands associated with ice processes (collisions, shearing, cracking etc.) [15]. 
 
 
Fig.5: Evolution of sound levels in the “shipping bands” during successive winters (no 
shipping, maximum to full ice cover). 
4. CONCLUSION 
Climate change and potential increases in shipping in the Arctic were the key motivation 
to assess the role of the MSFD “shipping bands” in settings very different from its original 
areas of application, and rapidly evolving. We used long-term acoustic measurements 
made by Ocean Networks Canada at its Cambridge Bay community observatory,

supplemented with ice profiler data, ice auger drilling and satellite charts from the 
Canadian Ice Service, to assess variations in “shipping bands” in August (little to no ice, 
shipping) relative to May (extensive to full ice, no shipping). 
Shipping signatures can readily be identified by temporally continuous, loud levels of both 
“shipping bands” in this particular environment (shallow and Arctic), and this is 
confirmed by direct analyses of the spectrograms. Daily summaries with boxplots showing 
averages, lower and upper quartiles and outliers, can be advantageously used to identify 
days with shipping activity, for example to readily assess any increase in shipping levels 
over large timescales. In this particular case, the low levels of shipping identified by AIS 
[17] do not show yearly trends, although analyses of higher-frequency sounds are now 
being conducted to assess noise from other types of human activities. When there is 
maximal ice cover (and therefore no shipping), “shipping bands” show generally similar 
levels, with a very narrow spread, with outliers associated with ice processes (as 
corroborated by analyses of more third-octave bands). This article shows the usefulness of 
these “shipping bands” at 63 Hz and 125 Hz and how their relative levels vary. The results 
also show that, in shipping-free, ice-covered environments, these bands should be used 
with caution and supplemented with measurements at other third-octave bands. 
5. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS  
Ocean Networks Canada (ONC) have once again proved an invaluable resource for 
long-term, high-quality data and B. Biffard (ONC) is gratefully acknowledged for his 
technical clarifications. The Canadian Ice Service provided much useful information 
beyond the ice charts, including ice auger data. JD was a final-year MPhys undergraduate 
and conducted this work as part of his research project. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Andrew, R.K., Howe, B.M., Mercer, J.A., Dzieciuch, M.A., Ocean ambient sound: 
comparing the 1960s with the 1990s for a receiver off the California coast, Acoust. 
Res. Lett. Online, 3: 65–70, 2002. 
[2] McDonald, M.A., Hildebrand, J.A., Wiggins, S.M., Increases in deep ocean ambient 
noise in the Northeast Pacific west of San Nicolas Island, California. J. Acoust. Soc. 
Am., 120: 711–718, 2006. 
[3] McDonald, M.A., Hildebrand, J.A., Wiggins, S.M., Ross, D., A 50-year comparison 
of ambient ocean noise near San Clemente Island: a bathymetrically complex coastal 
region off Southern California, J. Acoust. Soc. Am., 124, 1985–1992, 2008. 
[4] Popper, A.N., Hastings, M.C., The effects of human-generated sound on fish. Integr. 
Zool., 4:43–52, 2009. 
[5] Slabbekoorn, H., Bouton, N., van Opzeeland, I., Coers, A., ten Cate, C., Popper, 
A.N., A noisy spring: the impact of globally rising underwater sound levels on fish, 
Trends Ecol. Evol., 25: 419–427, 2010. 
[6] TG Noise, Setting of EU Threshold Values for continuous underwater sound – MSFD 
Common Implementation Strategy, https://circabc.europa.eu/ui/welcome, 6 pp. 2022. 
[7] Merchant, N. D., Blondel, Ph., Dakin, D. T., & Dorocicz, J., Averaging underwater 
noise levels for environmental assessment of shipping. The Journal of the Acoustical 
Society of America, 132(4), EL343-EL349, 2012.

[8] Garrett J K, Blondel Ph, Godley B J, Pikesley S K, Witt M J, Johanning L., Long-
term underwater sound measurements in the shipping noise indicator bands 63 Hz and 
125 Hz from the port of Falmouth Bay, UK, Mar. Pollut. Bull., 110:438-448, 2016. 
[9] Whaley et al., Model evaluation of short-lived climate forcers for the Arctic 
Monitoring and Assessment Programme: a multi-species, multi-model study, 
Atmospheric Chem. Phys., 22(5) 775-828, 2022. 
[10] 
von Schuckman, K. et al., Copernicus Marine Service Ocean State Report, 
Journal of Operational Oceanography, 11:sup1, S1-S142, 2018. 
[11] 
Wadhams, P., Ice in the Ocean, CRC Press, 308 pp., 2000. 
[12] 
AMAP (Arctic Monitoring and Assessment Programme), Arctic Climate 
Change Update 2021: Key Trends and Impacts. Summary for Policy-makers, AMAP, 
Tromsø, Norway. 16 pp., 2021. 
[13] 
Smith, L.C., S.R. Stephenson, New Trans-Arctic shipping routes navigable by 
mid-century, PNAS, 110(13), E1191-E1195, 2013. 
[14] 
Merchant, N.D., K.M. Fristrup, M.P. Johnson, P.L. Tyack, M.J. Witt, Ph. 
Blondel, S.E. Parks, Measuring acoustic habitats, Methods in Ecology and Evolution, 
6(3):25-265, 2015. 
[15] 
Blondel, Ph., F. Bichan, L. Lewry, H. Hallett, G. McCarthy, Acoustic 
properties of Arctic sea ice, from year-long underwater measurements in Cambridge 
Bay, Canada, in International Conference on Underwater Acoustics (ICUA), 2022. 
[16] 
Canadian 
Ice 
Service, 
Canadian 
Ice 
Service 
archive, 
https://www.canada.ca/en/environmentclimate-change/services/ice-forecasts-
observations/latest-conditions/archive-overview.html, 2023. 
[17] 
ONC (Ocean Networks Canada), Celebrating 10 years of Cambridge Bay 
Observatory, https://www.oceannetworks.ca/news-and-stories/stories-celebrating-10-
years-cambridge-bay-observatory, 2023 
[18] 
Cook, E., J. Winters, K. Anthony, D. Barclay, E. Oliver, Determining the 
speed dependent source level of a snowmobile traveling on sea-ice, J. Acoust. Soc. 
Am., vol. 152, A72, 2022